UNITED STATES SENTENCING COMMISSION
GUIDELINES MANUAL
2016
SUPPLEMENT TO
APPENDIX C
PATTI B. SARIS
Chair
CHARLES R. BREYER
Vice Chair
DABNEY L. FRIEDRICH
Commissioner
RACHEL E. BARKOW
Commissioner
WILLIAM H. PRYOR, JR.
Commissioner
MICHELLE MORALES
Commissioner, Ex-officio
J. PATRICIA WILSON SMOOT
Commissioner, Ex-officio
This document contains amendments to the Guidelines Manual effective November 1,
2012, November 1, 2013, November 1, 2014, November 1, 2015, August 1, 2016, and
November 1, 2016.
Amendment 761
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 1
SUPPLEMENT TO APPENDIX C
AMENDMENTS TO THE GUIDELINES MANUAL
This supplement to Appendix C presents amendments to the guidelines, policy state-
ments, and official commentary effective November 1, 2012; November 1, 2013; November 1,
2014; November 1, 2015; August 1, 2016; and November 1, 2016.
For amendments to the guidelines, policy statements, and official commentary effective
November 1, 2004; October 24, 2005; November 1, 2005; March 27, 2006; September 12, 2006;
November 1, 2006; May 1, 2007; November 1, 2007; February 6, 2008; March 3, 2008; May 1,
2008; November 1, 2008; November 1, 2009; November 1, 2010; and November 1, 2011, see Ap-
pendix C, Volume III. For amendments effective November 1, 1998; May 1, 2000; November 1,
2000; December 16, 2000; May 1, 2001; November 1, 2001; November 1, 2002; January 25,
2003; April 30, 2003; October 27, 2003; November 1, 2003; and November 5, 2003, see Appen-
dix C, Volume II. For amendments effective November 1, 1997, and earlier, see Appendix C,
Volume I.
The format under which the amendments are presented in Appendix C, including this
supplement, is designed to facilitate a comparison between previously existing and amended
provisions, in the event it becomes necessary to reference the former guideline, policy state-
ment, or commentary language.
AMENDMENTS
AMENDMENT 761
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §2B1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in
Note 3(E) by adding at the end the following:
“(iii) Notwithstanding clause (ii), in the case of a fraud involving a mortgage loan, if
the collateral has not been disposed of by the time of sentencing, use the fair
market value of the collateral as of the date on which the guilt of the defendant
has been established, whether by guilty plea, trial, or plea of nolo contendere.
In such a case, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the most recent
tax assessment value of the collateral is a reasonable estimate of the fair mar-
ket value. In determining whether the most recent tax assessment value is a
reasonable estimate of the fair market value, the court may consider, among
other factors, the recency of the tax assessment and the extent to which the
jurisdiction’s tax assessment practices reflect factors not relevant to fair mar-
ket value.”;
in Note 3(F) by adding at the end the following:
“(ix) Fraudulent Inflation or Deflation in Value of Securities or Commodities.—In a
case involving the fraudulent inflation or deflation in the value of a publicly
traded security or commodity, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the
Amendment 761
2 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
actual loss attributable to the change in value of the security or commodity is
the amount determined by—
(I) calculating the difference between the average price of the security or
commodity during the period that the fraud occurred and the average
price of the security or commodity during the 90-day period after the
fraud was disclosed to the market, and
(II) multiplying the difference in average price by the number of shares
outstanding.
In determining whether the amount so determined is a reasonable estimate of
the actual loss attributable to the change in value of the security or commodity,
the court may consider, among other factors, the extent to which the amount
so determined includes significant changes in value not resulting from the of-
fense (e.g., changes caused by external market forces, such as changed eco-
nomic circumstances, changed investor expectations, and new industry-spe-
cific or firm-specific facts, conditions, or events).”;
in Note 12(A) by adding at the end the following:
“(v) One or more of the criteria in clauses (i) through (iv) was likely to result from
the offense but did not result from the offense because of federal government
intervention, such as a ‘bailout’.”;
in Note 12(B)(ii) by adding at the end the following:
“(VII) One or more of the criteria in subclauses (I) through (VI) was likely to result
from the offense but did not result from the offense because of federal govern-
ment intervention, such as a ‘bailout’.”;
in Note 19(A)(iv) by inserting before the period at the end the following: “, such as a
risk of a significant disruption of a national financial market”;
and in Note 19(C) by adding after the first paragraph the following new paragraph:
“For example, a securities fraud involving a fraudulent statement made publicly to the
market may produce an aggregate loss amount that is substantial but diffuse, with
relatively small loss amounts suffered by a relatively large number of victims. In such
a case, the loss table in subsection (b)(1) and the victims table in subsection (b)(2) may
combine to produce an offense level that substantially overstates the seriousness of the
offense. If so, a downward departure may be warranted.”.
Section 2B1.4(b) is amended by striking “Characteristic” and inserting “Characteris-
tics”; and by adding at the end the following:
“(2) If the offense involved an organized scheme to engage in insider trading and
the offense level determined above is less than level 14, increase to level 14.”.
The Commentary to §2B1.4 captioned “Application Note” is amended in the caption by
striking “Note” and inserting “Notes”; by redesignating Note 1 as Note 2 and inserting
before Note 2 (as so redesignated) the following:
Amendment 761
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 3
“1. Application of Subsection (b)(2).—For purposes of subsection (b)(2), an ‘orga-
nized scheme to engage in insider trading’ means a scheme to engage in insider
trading that involves considered, calculated, systematic, or repeated efforts to
obtain and trade on inside information, as distinguished from fortuitous or op-
portunistic instances of insider trading.
The following is a non-exhaustive list of factors that the court may consider in
determining whether the offense involved an organized scheme to engage in
insider trading:
(A) the number of transactions;
(B) the dollar value of the transactions;
(C) the number of securities involved;
(D) the duration of the offense;
(E) the number of participants in the scheme (although such a scheme may
exist even in the absence of more than one participant);
(F) the efforts undertaken to obtain material, nonpublic information;
(G) the number of instances in which material, nonpublic information was
obtained; and
(H) the efforts undertaken to conceal the offense.”;
in Note 2 (as so redesignated) by striking “only”; and by adding at the end the following
new paragraph:
“Furthermore, §3B1.3 should be applied if the defendant’s employment in a position
that involved regular participation or professional assistance in creating, issuing, buy-
ing, selling, or trading securities or commodities was used to facilitate significantly the
commission or concealment of the offense. It would apply, for example, to a hedge fund
professional who regularly participates in securities transactions or to a lawyer who
regularly provides professional assistance in securities transactions, if the defendant’s
employment in such a position was used to facilitate significantly the commission or
concealment of the offense. It ordinarily would not apply to a position such as a clerical
worker in an investment firm, because such a position ordinarily does not involve spe-
cial skill. See §3B1.3, comment. (n. 4).”.
The Commentary to §2B1.4 captioned “Background” is amended by adding at the end
the following new paragraph:
“ Subsection (b)(2) implements the directive to the Commission in sec-
tion 1079A(a)(1)(A) of Public Law 111–203.”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to the two directives to the Com-
mission in the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub.
L. 111–203 (the “Act”). The first directive relates to securities fraud and similar of-
fenses, and the second directive relates to mortgage fraud and financial institution
fraud.
Amendment 761
4 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Securities Fraud and Similar Offenses
Section 1079A(a)(1)(A) of the Act directs the Commission to “review and, if appropriate,
amend” the guidelines and policy statements applicable to “persons convicted of of-
fenses relating to securities fraud or any other similar provision of law, in order to
reflect the intent of Congress that penalties for the offenses under the guidelines and
policy statements appropriately account for the potential and actual harm to the public
and the financial markets from the offenses.” Section 1079A(a)(1)(B) provides that in
promulgating any such amendment the Commission shall—
(i) ensure that the guidelines and policy statements, particularly section
2B1.1(b)(14) and section 2B1.1(b)(17) (and any successors thereto), re-
flect—
(I) the serious nature of the offenses described in subparagraph
(A);
(II) the need for an effective deterrent and appropriate punishment
to prevent the offenses; and
(III) the effectiveness of incarceration in furthering the objectives
described in subclauses (I) and (II);
(ii) consider the extent to which the guidelines appropriately account for
the potential and actual harm to the public and the financial markets
resulting from the offenses;
(iii) ensure reasonable consistency with other relevant directives and
guidelines and Federal statutes;
(iv) make any necessary conforming changes to guidelines; and
(v) ensure that the guidelines adequately meet the purposes of sentencing,
as set forth in section 3553(a)(2) of title 18, United States Code.
The amendment responds to this directive in two ways. First, the amendment amends
the fraud guideline, §2B1.1 (Theft, Property Destruction, and Fraud), to provide a spe-
cial rule for determining actual loss in cases involving the fraudulent inflation or de-
flation in the value of a publicly traded security or commodity. Case law and comments
received by the Commission indicate that determinations of loss in cases involving se-
curities fraud and similar offenses are complex and that a variety of different methods
are in use, possibly resulting in unwarranted sentencing disparities.
The amendment amends §2B1.1 to provide a special rule regarding how to calculate
actual loss in these types of cases. Specifically, the amendment creates a new Applica-
tion Note 3(F)(ix) which establishes a rebuttable presumption that “the actual loss at-
tributable to the change in value of the security or commodity is the amount deter-
mined by (I) calculating the difference between the average price of the security or
commodity during the period that the fraud occurred and the average price of the se-
curity or commodity during the 90-day period after the fraud was disclosed to the mar-
ket, and (II) multiplying the difference in average price by the number of shares out-
standing.” The special rule further provides that, “[i]n determining whether the
amount so determined is a reasonable estimate of the actual loss attributable to the
change in value of the security or commodity, the court may consider, among other
factors, the extent to which the amount so determined includes significant changes in
value not resulting from the offense (e.g., changes caused by external market forces,
Amendment 761
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 5
such as changed economic circumstances, changed investor expectations, and new in-
dustry-specific or firm-specific facts, conditions, or events).”
The special rule is based upon what is sometimes referred to as the “modified rescis-
sory method” and should ordinarily provide a “reasonable estimate of the loss” as re-
quired by Application Note 3(C). This special rule is intended to provide courts a work-
able and consistent formula for calculating loss that “resulted from the offense.”
See §2B1.1, comment. (n.3(A)(i)). By averaging the stock price during the period in
which the fraud occurred and a set 90-day period after the fraud was discovered, the
special rule reduces the impact on the loss calculation of factors other than the fraud,
such as overall growth or decline in the price of the stock. See, e.g., United States v.
Bakhit, 218 F. Supp. 2d 1232 (C.D. Cal. 2002); United States v. Snyder, 291 F.3d 1291
(11th Cir. 2002); United States v. Brown, 595 F.3d 498 (3d Cir. 2010); see also 15 U.S.C.
§ 78u-4(e) (statutorily setting forth a similar method for loss calculation in the context
of private securities litigation). Furthermore, applying this special rule could “elimi-
nate[], or at least reduce[], the complexity, uncertainty, and expense inherent in at-
tempting to determine out-of-pocket losses on a case-by-case basis.” See United States
v. Grabske, 260 F. Supp. 2d. 866, 873–74 (N.D. Cal. 2002).
By applying a rebuttable presumption, however, the amendment also provides suffi-
cient flexibility for a court to consider the extent to which the amount determined un-
der the special rule includes significant changes in value not resulting from the offense
(e.g., changes caused by external market forces, such as changed economic circum-
stances, changed investor expectations, and new industry-specific or firm-specific
facts, conditions, or events).
The amendment also responds to the first directive by amending the insider trading
guideline, §2B1.4 (Insider Trading). First, it provides a new specific offense character-
istic if the offense involved an “organized scheme to engage in insider trading.” In such
a case, the new specific offense characteristic provides a minimum offense level of 14.
The commentary is also amended to provide factors the court may consider in deter-
mining whether the new minimum offense level applies.
The amendment reflects the Commission’s view that a defendant who engages in con-
sidered, calculated, systematic, or repeated efforts to obtain and trade on inside infor-
mation (as opposed to fortuitous or opportunistic instances of insider trading) war-
rants, at minimum, a short but definite period of incarceration. Sentencing data indi-
cate that when a defendant engages in an organized insider trading scheme, the gain
from the offense ordinarily triggers an enhancement under §2B1.4(b)(1) of sufficient
magnitude to result in a guideline range that requires a period of imprisonment. The
amendment, however, ensures that the guidelines require a period of incarceration
even in such a case involving relatively little gain.
The amendment also amends the commentary to §2B1.4 to provide more guidance on
the applicability of §3B1.3 (Abuse of Position of Trust or Use of Special Skill) in insider
trading cases. In particular, the new commentary in Application Note 2 provides that
§3B1.3 should be applied if the defendant’s employment in a position that involved
regular participation or professional assistance in creating, issuing, buying, selling, or
trading securities or commodities was used to facilitate significantly the commission
or concealment of the offense. The commentary further provides examples of positions
that may qualify for the adjustment, including a hedge fund professional who regularly
participates in securities transactions or a lawyer who regularly provides professional
assistance in securities transactions. Individuals who occupy such positions possess
special knowledge regarding the financial markets and the rules prohibiting insider
Amendment 761
6 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
trading, and generally are viewed as more culpable. See §3B1.3, comment. (backg’d.).
The commentary also provides as an example of a position that would not qualify for
the adjustment in §3B1.4 a clerical worker in an investment firm. Such a position or-
dinarily does not involve special skill and is not generally viewed as more culpable.
Mortgage Fraud and Financial Institution Fraud
Section 1079A(a)(2)(A) of the Act directs the Commission to “review and, if appropriate,
amend” the guidelines and policy statements applicable to “persons convicted of fraud
offenses relating to financial institutions or federally related mortgage loans and any
other similar provisions of law, to reflect the intent of Congress that the penalties for
the offenses under the guidelines and policy statements ensure appropriate terms of
imprisonment for offenders involved in substantial bank frauds or other frauds relat-
ing to financial institutions.” Section 1079A(a)(2)(B) of the Act provides that, in prom-
ulgating any such amendment, the Commission shall—
(i) ensure that the guidelines and policy statements reflect—
(I) the serious nature of the offenses described in subpara-
graph (A);
(II) the need for an effective deterrent and appropriate punishment
to prevent the offenses; and
(III) the effectiveness of incarceration in furthering the objectives
described in subclauses (I) and (II);
(ii) consider the extent to which the guidelines appropriately account for
the potential and actual harm to the public and the financial markets
resulting from the offenses;
(iii) ensure reasonable consistency with other relevant directives and
guidelines and Federal statutes;
(iv) make any necessary conforming changes to guidelines; and
(v) ensure that the guidelines adequately meet the purposes of sentencing,
as set forth in section 3553(a)(2) of title 18, United States Code.
The amendment responds to this directive in two ways.
First, the amendment adds language to the credits against loss rule, found in Applica-
tion Note 3(E) of the commentary to §2B1.1. Application Note 3(E)(i) generally provides
that the determination of loss under subsection (b)(1) shall be reduced by the money
returned and the fair market value of the property returned and services rendered to
the victim before the offense was detected. In the context of a case involving collateral
pledged or otherwise provided by the defendant, Application Note 3(E)(ii) provides that
the loss to the victim shall be reduced by either “the amount the victim has recovered
at the time of sentencing from disposition of the collateral, or if the collateral has not
been disposed of by that time, the fair market value of the collateral at the time of
sentencing.”
The Commission received comment that, in cases involving mortgage fraud where the
collateral has not been disposed of by the time of sentencing, the fair market value of
Amendment 761
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 7
the collateral may be difficult to determine and may require frequent updating, espe-
cially in cases involving multiple properties. The comments further indicate that the
lack of a uniform process may result in unwarranted sentencing disparities.
The amendment responds to these concerns by establishing a new Application Note
3(E)(iii) applicable to fraud cases involving a mortgage loan where the underlying col-
lateral has not been disposed of by the time of sentencing. In such a case, new Appli-
cation Note 3(E)(iii) makes two changes to the calculation of credits against loss. First,
the note changes the date on which the fair market value of the collateral is deter-
mined, from the time of sentencing to the date on which the guilt of the defendant has
been established. This change is intended to avoid the need to reassess the fair market
value of such collateral on multiple occasions up to the date of sentencing. Second, it
establishes a rebuttable presumption that the most recent tax assessment value of the
collateral is a reasonable estimate of the fair market value. In determining whether
the tax assessment is a reasonable estimate of fair market value, the note further pro-
vides that the court may consider the recency of the tax assessment and the extent to
which the jurisdiction’s tax assessment practices reflect factors not relevant to fair
market value, among other factors.
By structuring the special rule in this manner, the amendment addresses the need to
provide a uniform practicable method for determining fair market value of undisposed
collateral while providing sufficient flexibility for courts to address differences among
jurisdictions regarding how closely the most recent tax assessment correlates to fair
market value. The Commission heard concerns, for example, that, in some jurisdic-
tions, the most recent tax assessment may be outdated or based upon factors, such as
the age or status of the homeowner, that have no correlation to fair market value.
The amendment also responds to the second directive by amending the commentary
regarding the application of §2B1.1(b)(15)(B), which provides an enhancement of 4 lev-
els if the offense involved specific types of financial harms (e.g., jeopardizing a financial
institution or organization). This commentary, contained in Application Note 12 to
§2B1.1, provides a non-exhaustive list of factors the court shall consider in determining
whether, as a result of the offense, the safety and soundness of a financial institution
or an organization that was a publicly traded company or that had more than 1,000 em-
ployees was substantially jeopardized. For example, in the context of financial institu-
tions, the court shall consider whether the financial institution became insolvent, was
forced to reduce benefits to pensioners or insureds, was unable on demand to refund
fully any deposit, payment, or investment, or was so depleted of its assets as to be
forced to merge with another institution. Similarly, in the context of a covered organi-
zation, the court shall consider whether the organization became insolvent or suffered
a substantial reduction in the value of its assets, filed for bankruptcy, suffered a sub-
stantial reduction in the value of its equity securities or its employee retirement ac-
counts, or substantially reduced its workforce or employee pension benefits.
The amendment amends Application Note 12 to add as a new consideration whether
one of the listed harms was likely to result from the offense, but did not result from
the offense because of federal government intervention, such as a “bailout.” This
amendment reflects the Commission’s intent that §2B1.1(b)(15)(B) account for the risk
of harm from the defendant’s conduct and its view that a defendant should not avoid
the application of the enhancement because the harm that was otherwise likely to re-
sult from the offense conduct did not occur because of fortuitous federal government
intervention.
Amendment 762
8 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Departure Provisions
Finally, the amendment also responds to the Act’s directives by amending the depar-
ture provisions in §2B1.1 to provide two examples of cases in which a departure may
be warranted.
First, the amendment amends Application Note 19(A)(iv), which provides that an up-
ward departure may be warranted if the offense created a risk of substantial loss be-
yond the loss determined for purposes of subsection (b)(1). The amendment adds “risk
of a significant disruption of a national financial market” as an example of such a risk.
This part of the amendment responds to the requirement in the Act to consider
whether the guidelines applicable to the offenses covered by the directives appropri-
ately “account for the potential and actual harm to the public and the financial mar-
kets[.]”
The amendment also amends Application Note 19(C), which provides that a downward
departure may be warranted if the offense level substantially overstates the serious-
ness of the offense, by adding an example of a case in which such a departure may be
appropriate. The example provides that “a securities fraud involving a fraudulent
statement made publicly to the market may produce an aggregate loss amount that is
substantial but diffuse, with relatively small loss amounts suffered by a relatively
large number of victims,” and that, “in such a case, the loss table in subsection (b)(1)
and the victims table in subsection (b)(2) may combine to produce an offense level that
substantially overstates the seriousness of the offense.” This part of the amendment
responds to concerns raised in comment and case law that the cumulative impact of
the loss table and the victims table may overstate the seriousness of the offense in
certain cases.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2012.
AMENDMENT 762
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §2D1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in
Note 10(D) in the subdivision captioned “Cocaine and Other Schedule I and II Stimu-
lants (and their immediate precursors)” by inserting after the entry relating to N-N-
Dimethylamphetamine the following new entry:
“1 gm of N-Benzylpiperazine = 100 gm of marihuana”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to concerns raised by the Second
Circuit Court of Appeals and others regarding the sentencing of offenders convicted of
offenses involving BZP (N-Benzylpiperazine), which is a Schedule I stimulant.
See United States v. Figueroa, 647 F.3d 466 (2d Cir. 2011). The amendment estab-
lishes a marijuana equivalency for BZP offenses in the Drug Equivalency Table pro-
vided in Application Note 10(D) in §2D1.1 (Unlawful Manufacturing, Importing, Ex-
porting, or Trafficking (Including Possession with Intent to Commit These Offenses);
Attempt or Conspiracy). The marijuana equivalency established by the amendment
provides that 1 gram of BZP equals 100 grams of marijuana.
Prior to the amendment, the Drug Equivalency Table did not include a marijuana
equivalency for BZP. As a result, in offenses involving BZP, the court determined the
Amendment 763
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 9
base offense level using the marijuana equivalency of “the most closely related con-
trolled substance” referenced in §2D1.1. See §2D1.1, comment. (n. 5). In determining
the most closely related controlled substance, the commentary directs the court to con-
sider (1) whether the controlled substance not referenced in §2D1.1 has a chemical
structure that is substantially similar to a controlled substance that is referenced in
§2D1.1, (2) whether the controlled substance not referenced in §2D1.1 has a stimulant,
depressant, or hallucinogenic effect similar to a controlled substance referenced in the
guideline, and (3) whether a lesser or greater quantity of the controlled substance not
referenced in §2D1.1 is needed to produce a substantially similar effect as a controlled
substance that is referenced in §2D1.1.
In applying these factors, courts have reached different conclusions regarding which
controlled substance referenced in §2D1.1 is most closely related to BZP and have
therefore used different marijuana equivalencies in sentencing BZP offenders. The
Commission’s review of case law and sentencing data indicate that some district courts
have found that the controlled substance most closely related to BZP is amphetamine
and used the marijuana equivalency for amphetamine, see United States v. Major,
801 F. Supp. 2d 511, 514 (E.D. Va. 2011) (using the marijuana equivalency for amphet-
amine at full potency), while other district courts have found that the controlled sub-
stance most related to BZP is MDMA, but at varying potencies. See United States v.
Bennett, 659 F.3d 711, 715–16 (8th Cir. 2011) (affirming a district court’s use of the
marijuana equivalency for MDMA at full potency); United States v. Rose,
722 F. Supp. 2d 1286, 1289 (M.D. Ala. 2010) (concluding that BZP is most closely re-
lated to MDMA, but imposing a variance to reflect BZP’s reduced potency compared to
MDMA). The different findings of which controlled substance is the most closely re-
lated to BZP, and the application of different potencies of those controlled substances,
have resulted in courts imposing vastly different sentence lengths for the same con-
duct.
The Commission reviewed scientific literature and received expert testimony and com-
ment relating to BZP and concluded that BZP is a stimulant with pharmacologic prop-
erties similar to that of amphetamine, but is only one-tenth to one-twentieth as potent
as amphetamine, depending on the particular user’s history of drug abuse. Accord-
ingly, in order to promote uniformity in sentencing BZP offenders and to reflect the
best available scientific evidence, the amendment establishes a marijuana equivalency
of 1 gram of BZP equals 100 grams of marijuana. This corresponds to one-twentieth of
the marijuana equivalency for amphetamine, which is 1 gram of amphetamine equals
2 kilograms (or 2,000 grams) of marijuana.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2012.
AMENDMENT 763
AMENDMENT: Section 2D1.11 is amended in subsection (b) by adding at the end the
following:
“(6) If the defendant meets the criteria set forth in subdivisions (1)–(5) of subsec-
tion (a) of §5C1.2 (Limitation on Applicability of Statutory Minimum Sentences
in Certain Cases), decrease by 2 levels.”.
The Commentary to 2D1.11 captioned “Application Notes” is amended by adding at
the end the following:
Amendment 763
10 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
“9. Applicability of Subsection (b)(6).—The applicability of subsection (b)(6) shall
be determined without regard to the offense of conviction. If subsection (b)(6)
applies, §5C1.2(b) does not apply. See §5C1.2(b)(2)(requiring a minimum of-
fense level of level 17 if the ‘statutorily required minimum sentence is at least
five years’).”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment adds a new specific offense characteristic
at subsection (b)(6) of §2D1.11 (Unlawfully Distributing, Importing, Exporting or Pos-
sessing a Listed Chemical; Attempt or Conspiracy) that provides a 2-level decrease if
the defendant meets the criteria set forth in subdivisions (1)–(5) of subsection (a) of
§5C1.2 (Limitation on Applicability of Statutory Minimum Sentences in Certain Cases)
(commonly referred to as the “safety valve” criteria). The new specific offense charac-
teristic in §2D1.11 parallels the existing 2-level decrease at subsection (b)(16) of
§2D1.1(Unlawful Manufacturing, Importing, Exporting, or Trafficking (Including Pos-
session with Intent to Commit These Offenses); Attempt or Conspiracy).
The Commission in 1995 created the 2-level reduction in §2D1.1 for offenders who meet
the safety valve criteria in response to a directive in section 80001 of the Violent Crime
Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, Pub. L. No. 103–322. Section 80001 pro-
vided an exception to otherwise applicable statutory minimum sentences for defend-
ants convicted of specified drug offenses and who meet the criteria specified in
18 U.S.C. § 3553(f)(1)–(5), and directed the Commission to promulgate guidelines to
carry out these purposes. The reduction in §2D1.1 initially was limited to defendants
whose offense level was level 26 or greater, see USSG App. C, Amendment 515 (effec-
tive November 1, 1995), but was subsequently expanded to apply to offenders with an
offense level lower than level 26 to address proportionality concerns. See USSG App. C,
Amendment 624 (effective November 1, 2001). Specifically, the Commission deter-
mined that limiting the applicability of the reduction to defendants with an offense
level of level 26 or greater “is inconsistent with the general principles underlying the
two-level reduction . . . to provide lesser punishment for first time, nonviolent offend-
ers.” Id.
For similar reasons of proportionality, this amendment expands application of the
2-level reduction to offenses involving list I and list II chemicals sentenced under
§2D1.11. List I chemicals are important to the manufacture of a controlled substance
and usually become part of the final product, while list II chemicals are generally used
as solvents, catalysts, and reagents. See USSG §2D1.11, comment. (backg’d.). Sec-
tion 2D1.11 is generally structured to provide base offense levels that are tied to, but
less severe than, the base offense levels in §2D1.1 for offenses involving the final prod-
uct. The Commission determined that adding the 2-level reduction for meeting the
safety valve criteria in §2D1.11 would promote the proportionality the Commission has
intended to achieve between §§2D1.1 and 2D1.11.
The amendment also adds new commentary relating to the “safety valve” reduction in
§2D1.11 that is consistent with the commentary relating to the “safety valve” reduction
in §2D1.1. See USSG §2D1.1, comment. (n. 21). The commentary makes clear that the
new 2-level reduction in §2D1.11 applies regardless of the offense of conviction, and
that the minimum offense level of 17 in subsection (b) of §5C1.2 (Limitation on Ap-
plicability of Statutory Minimum Sentences in Certain Cases) does not apply. Section
5C1.2(b) provides for an offense level not less than level 17 for defendants who meet
the criteria of subdivisions (1) – (5) of section (a) in §5C1.2 and for whom the statutorily
required minimum sentence is at least 5 years. See USSG App. C, Amendment 624
(effective November 1, 2001). Since none of the offenses referenced to §2D1.11 carries
Amendment 764
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 11
a statutory mandatory minimum, the minimum offense level of 17 at §5C1.2(b) does
not affect application of the new 2-level reduction in §2D1.11.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2012.
AMENDMENT 764
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §2L1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in
Note 1(B)(vii) by inserting before the period at the end the following: “, but only if the
revocation occurred before the defendant was deported or unlawfully remained in the
United States”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to a circuit conflict over the ap-
plication of the enhancements found at §2L1.2(b)(1)(A) and (B) to a defendant who was
sentenced on two or more occasions for the same drug trafficking conviction (e.g., be-
cause of a revocation of probation, parole, or supervised release), such that there was
a sentence imposed before the defendant’s deportation, then an additional sentence
imposed after the deportation. The amendment resolves the conflict by amending the
definition of “sentence imposed” in Application Note 1(B)(vii) to §2L1.2 (Unlawfully
Entering or Remaining in the United States) to state that the length of the sentence
imposed includes terms of imprisonment given upon revocation of probation, parole, or
supervised release, but “only if the revocation occurred before the defendant was de-
ported or unlawfully remained in the United States.”
Section 2L1.2(b)(1) generally reflects the Commission’s determination that both the
seriousness and the timing of the prior offense for which the defendant was deported
are relevant to assessing the defendant’s culpability for the illegal reentry offense. A
defendant who was deported after a conviction for a felony drug trafficking offense
receives an enhancement under either prong (A) or (B) of subsection (b)(1), depending
on the length of the sentence imposed. If the sentence imposed was more than
13 months, the defendant receives a 16-level enhancement to the base offense level
under prong (A). If the sentence imposed was 13 months or less, the defendant receives
a 12-level enhancement under prong (B). However, for defendants whose prior convic-
tions are remote in time and thus do not receive criminal history points, these enhance-
ments are reduced to 12 levels and 8 levels, respectively.
The majority of circuits that have considered the meaning of “sentence imposed” in this
context have held that the later, additional sentence imposed after deportation does
not lengthen the sentence imposed for purposes of the subsection (b)(1) enhancement.
See United States v. Bustillos-Pena, 612 F.3d 863 (5th Cir. 2010); United States v.
Lopez, 634 F.3d 948 (7th Cir. 2011); United States v. Rosales-Garcia, 667 F.3d 1348
(10th Cir. 2012); United States v. Guzman-Bera, 216 F.3d 1019 (11th Cir. 2000). Under
the majority approach, if the sentence imposed was 13 months or less before the de-
fendant was deported, and was only increased to more than 13 months after the de-
portation, the defendant is not subject to the enhancement in prong (A) because the
“sentence imposed” includes only the sentence imposed before the deportation. Under
this approach, such a defendant receives the enhancement in prong (B) instead.
The Second Circuit has reached the contrary conclusion, holding that defendants who
had their sentences increased to more than 13 months upon revocation after deporta-
Amendment 765
12 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
tion are subject to the enhancement in prong (A) because the “sentence imposed” in-
cludes the additional revocation sentence imposed after deportation. See United States
v. Compres-Paulino, 393 F.3d 116 (2d Cir. 2004).
The amendment adopts the approach taken by the majority of circuits, with the result
that the term of imprisonment imposed upon revocation counts toward the calculation
of the offense level in §2L1.2 only if it was imposed before the defendant was deported
or unlawfully remained in the United States. According to public comment and testi-
mony received by the Commission, and as courts have observed, the circumstances
under which persons are found present in this country and have their probation, pa-
role, or supervised release revoked for a prior offense vary widely. See Bustillos-Pena,
612 F.3d at 867–68 (describing differences among revocation proceedings). In some ju-
risdictions, the revocation is typically based on the offender’s illegal return, while in
others, the revocation is typically based on the offender’s committing an additional
crime. Furthermore, in some cases revocation proceedings commonly occur before the
offender is sentenced on the illegal reentry offense, while in other cases the revocation
occurs after the federal sentencing. See Rosales-Garcia, 667 F.3d at 1354 (observing
that considering post-deportation revocation sentences could result in disparities
based on the “happenstance” of whether that revocation occurred before or after the
prosecution for the illegal reentry offense). Therefore, assessing the seriousness of the
prior crime based on the sentence imposed before deportation should result in more
consistent application of the enhancements in §2L1.2(b)(1)(A) and (B) and promote
uniformity in sentencing.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2012.
AMENDMENT 765
AMENDMENT: Section 2L2.2 is amended in subsection (b) by adding at the end the fol-
lowing:
“(4) (Apply the Greater):
(A) If the defendant committed any part of the instant offense to conceal
the defendant’s membership in, or authority over, a military, paramil-
itary, or police organization that was involved in a serious human
rights offense during the period in which the defendant was such a
member or had such authority, increase by 2 levels. If the resulting
offense level is less than level 13, increase to level 13.
(B) If the defendant committed any part of the instant offense to conceal
the defendant’s participation in (i) the offense of incitement to geno-
cide, increase by 6 levels; or (ii) any other serious human rights offense,
increase by 10 levels. If clause (ii) applies and the resulting offense
level is less than level 25, increase to level 25.”.
The Commentary to 2L2.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended by redesignating
Notes 4 and 5 as Notes 5 and 6, respectively; and by inserting after Note 3 the follow-
ing:
“4. Application of Subsection (b)(4).—For purposes of subsection (b)(4):
Amendment 765
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 13
‘Serious human rights offense’ means (A) violations of federal criminal laws
relating to genocide, torture, war crimes, and the use or recruitment of child
soldiers under sections 1091, 2340, 2340A, 2441, and 2442 of title 18, United
States Code, see 28 U.S.C. § 509B(e); and (B) conduct that would have been a
violation of any such law if the offense had occurred within the jurisdiction of
the United States or if the defendant or the victim had been a national of the
United States.
‘The offense of incitement to genocide’ means (A) violations of 18 U.S.C.
§ 1091(c); and (B) conduct that would have been a violation of such section if
the offense had occurred within the jurisdiction of the United States or if the
defendant or the victim had been a national of the United States.”.
Chapter Three, Part A is amended by adding at the end the following new guideline
and accompanying commentary:
“§3A1.5. Serious Human Rights Offense
If the defendant was convicted of a serious human rights offense, increase
the offense level as follows:
(a) If the defendant was convicted of an offense under 18 U.S.C.
§ 1091(c), increase by 2 levels.
(b) If the defendant was convicted of any other serious human rights
offense, increase by 4 levels. If (1) death resulted, and (2) the re-
sulting offense level is less than level 37, increase to level 37.
Commentary
Application Notes:
1. Definition.—For purposes of this guideline, ‘serious human rights offense’
means violations of federal criminal laws relating to genocide, torture, war
crimes, and the use or recruitment of child soldiers under sections 1091, 2340,
2340A, 2441, and 2442 of title 18, United States Code. See 28 U.S.C. § 509B(e).
2. Application of Minimum Offense Level in Subsection (b).—The minimum of-
fense level in subsection (b) is cumulative with any other provision in the
guidelines. For example, if death resulted and this factor was specifically in-
corporated into the Chapter Two offense guideline, the minimum offense level
in subsection (b) may also apply.
Background: This guideline covers a range of conduct considered to be serious human
rights offenses, including genocide, war crimes, torture, and the recruitment or use of
child soldiers. See generally 28 U.S.C. § 509B(e).
Serious human rights offenses generally have a statutory maximum term of
imprisonment of 20 years, but if death resulted, a higher statutory maximum term of
imprisonment of any term of years or life applies. See 18 U.S.C. §§ 1091(b), 2340A(a),
2442(b). For the offense of war crimes, a statutory maximum term of imprisonment of
any term of years or life always applies. See 18 U.S.C. § 2441(a). For the offense of
incitement to genocide, the statutory maximum term of imprisonment is five years.
See 18 U.S.C. § 1091(c).”.
Amendment 765
14 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Appendix A (Statutory Index) is amended by inserting after the line referenced to
18 U.S.C. § 2425 the following:
“18 U.S.C. § 2441 2X5.1”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment results from the Commission’s multi-year
review to ensure that the guidelines provide appropriate guidelines penalties for cases
involving human rights violations. This amendment addresses human rights violators
in two areas: defendants who are convicted of a human rights offense, and defendants
who are convicted of immigration or naturalization fraud to conceal the defendant’s
involvement, or possible involvement, in a human rights offense.
Serious Human Rights Offenses
First, the amendment addresses defendants whose instant offense of conviction is a
“serious human rights offense.” In the Human Rights Enforcement Act of 2009, Pub.
L. 111–122 (Dec. 22, 2009), Congress defined “serious human rights offenses” as “vio-
lations of Federal criminal laws relating to genocide, torture, war crimes, and the use
or recruitment of child soldiers under sections 1091, 2340, 2340A, 2441, and 2442 of
title 18, United States Code.” In that legislation, Congress authorized a new section
within the Department of Justice “with responsibility for the enforcement of laws
against suspected participants in [such] offenses.” That section was established the
following year, when the Human Rights and Special Prosecutions Section was created
in the Justice Department’s Criminal Division. Serious human rights offenses gener-
ally have a statutory maximum term of imprisonment of 20 years, but if death resulted,
a higher statutory maximum term of imprisonment of any term of years or life applies.
See 18 U.S.C. §§ 1091(b), 2340A(a), 2442(b). For the offense of war crimes, a statutory
maximum term of imprisonment of any term of years or life always applies.
See 18 U.S.C. § 2441(a). For the offense of incitement to genocide, the statutory maxi-
mum term of imprisonment is five years. See 18 U.S.C. § 1091(c).
Serious human rights offenses can be committed in a variety of ways, including, for
example, assault, kidnapping, and murder. As a result, the guidelines generally have
addressed these offenses by referencing them to a number of different Chapter Two
offense guidelines, such as §§2A1.1 (First Degree Murder), 2A1.2 (Second Degree Mur-
der), 2A2.1 (Assault with Intent to Commit Murder; Attempted Murder), 2A2.2 (Ag-
gravated Assault) and 2A4.1 (Kidnapping, Abduction, Unlawful Restraint). In addi-
tion, certain of these Chapter Two offense guidelines use as a base offense level the
offense level from another guideline applicable to the underlying conduct (e.g., §2H1.1
(Offenses Involving Individual Rights), which is the guideline to which genocide of-
fenses are referenced). The offense of committing a war crime in violation of 18 U.S.C.
§ 2441, however, has not been referenced to any guideline prior to this amendment.
The amendment amends Appendix A (Statutory Index) to reference these offenses to
§2X5.1 (Other Felony Offenses). Section 2X5.1 addresses the variety of ways in which
a war crimes offense may be committed by generally directing the court to apply the
most analogous offense guideline.
The amendment also establishes a new Chapter Three adjustment at §3A1.5 (Serious
Human Rights Offense) if the defendant was convicted of a serious human rights of-
fense. The new guideline provides two tiers of adjustments, corresponding to the dif-
fering statutory penalties that apply to such offenses. The adjustment generally pro-
vides a 4-level increase if the defendant was convicted of a serious human rights of-
Amendment 766
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 15
fense, and a minimum offense level of 37 if death resulted. If the defendant was con-
victed of an offense under 18 U.S.C. § 1091(c) for inciting genocide, however, the ad-
justment provides a 2-level increase in light of the lesser statutory maximum penalty
such offenses carry compared to the other offenses covered by this adjustment.
The new Chapter Three adjustment accounts for the particularly egregious nature of
serious human rights offenses while generally maintaining the proportionality pro-
vided by the various Chapter Two guidelines that cover such offenses.
Immigration Fraud
Second, the amendment addresses cases in which the offense of conviction is for immi-
gration or naturalization fraud and the defendant committed any part of the instant
offense to conceal the defendant’s involvement, or possible involvement, in a serious
human rights offense. These offenders are sentenced under §2L2.2 (Fraudulently Ac-
quiring Documents Relating to Naturalization, Citizenship, or Legal Resident Status
for Own Use; False Personation or Fraudulent Marriage by Alien to Evade Immigra-
tion Law; Fraudulently Acquiring or Improperly Using a United States Passport). The
offenders covered by this amendment fall into two categories. In the first category are
defendants who concealed their connection to a military, paramilitary, or police organ-
ization that was involved in a serious human rights offense. In the second category are
defendants who concealed having participated in a serious human rights offense.
The amendment adds a new specific offense characteristic to §2L2.2 at subsection (b)(4)
that contains two subparagraphs. Subparagraph (A) applies if the defendant commit-
ted any part of the instant offense to conceal the defendant’s membership in, or au-
thority over, a military, paramilitary, or police organization that was involved in a
serious human rights offense during the period in which the defendant was such a
member or had such authority, and provides a 2-level increase and a minimum offense
level of 13. Subparagraph (B) applies if the defendant committed any part of the in-
stant offense to conceal the defendant’s participation in a serious human rights offense,
and provides a 6-level increase if the offense was incitement to genocide, or a 10-level
increase and minimum offense level of 25 if the offense was any other serious human
rights offense. The amendment also adds an application note defining the terms “seri-
ous human rights offense” and “the offense of incitement to genocide.”
The new enhancement reflects the impact that such immigration fraud offenses can
have on the ability of immigration and naturalization authorities to make fully in-
formed decisions regarding the defendant’s immigration petition, application or other
request and is intended to ensure that the United States is not a safe haven for those
who have committed serious human rights offenses.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2012.
AMENDMENT 766
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §4A1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in
Note 5 by striking “counted. Such offenses are not minor traffic infractions within the
meaning of §4A1.2(c).” and inserting “always counted, without regard to how the of-
fense is classified. Paragraphs (1) and (2) of §4A1.2(c) do not apply.”.
Amendment 766
16 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment resolves differences among circuits regard-
ing when prior sentences for the misdemeanor offenses of driving while intoxicated
and driving under the influence (and any similar offenses by whatever name they are
known) are counted toward the defendant’s criminal history score.
Convictions for driving while intoxicated and similar offenses encompass a range of
offense conduct. For example, convictions for driving while intoxicated and similar of-
fenses can be classified as anything from traffic infractions to misdemeanors and felo-
nies, and they are subject to a broad spectrum of penalties (ranging from a fine to years
in custody for habitual offenders). When the prior offense is a felony, the sentence
clearly counts toward the defendant’s criminal history score because “[s]entences for
all felony offenses are counted.” See subsection (c) of §4A1.2 (Definitions and Instruc-
tions for Computing Criminal History). However, when the prior sentence is for a mis-
demeanor or petty offense, circuits have taken different approaches, in part because of
language added to §4A1.2(c)(1). See USSG App. C, Amendment 352 (effective Novem-
ber 1, 1990) (adding “careless or reckless driving” to the offenses listed in §4A1.2(c)(1)).
When the prior sentence is a misdemeanor or petty offense, §4A1.2(c) specifies that the
offense is counted, but with two exceptions, limited to cases in which the prior offense
is on (or similar to an offense that is on) either of two lists. On the first list are offenses
from “careless or reckless driving” to “trespassing.” In such a case, the sentence is
counted only if (A) the sentence was a term of probation of more than one year or a
term of imprisonment of at least 30 days, or (B) the prior offense was similar to the
instant offense. See §4A1.2(c)(1). On the second list are offenses from “fish and game
violations” to “vagrancy.” In such a case, the sentence is never counted.
See §4A1.2(c)(2).
Most circuits have held that driving while intoxicated convictions, including misde-
meanors and petty offenses, always count toward the criminal history score, without
exception, even if the offense met the criteria for either of the two lists. These circuits
have relied on Application Note 5 to §4A1.2, which has provided:
Sentences for Driving While Intoxicated or Under the Influence.—Con-
victions for driving while intoxicated or under the influence (and simi-
lar offenses by whatever name they are known) are counted. Such of-
fenses are not minor traffic infractions within the meaning of
§4A1.2(c).
See United States v. Pando, 545 F.3d 682, 683–85 (8th Cir. 2008) (holding that a con-
viction for driving while ability impaired was properly included in defendant’s criminal
history, and rejecting defendant’s argument that his offense was similar to careless or
reckless driving); United States v. Thornton, 444 F.3d 1163, 1165–67 (9th Cir. 2006)
(holding that driving with high blood alcohol level was properly included in defendant’s
criminal history, and rejecting defendant’s argument that his conviction was “similar”
to minor traffic infraction or public intoxication). See also United States v. LeBlanc,
45 F.3d 192, 195 (7th Cir. 1995) (“[A]pplication note [5] reflects the Sentencing Com-
mission’s conclusion ‘that driving while intoxicated offenses are of sufficient gravity to
merit inclusion in the defendant’s criminal history, however they might be classified
under state law.’ ”); United States v. Deigert, 916 F.2d 916, 918 (4th Cir. 1990) (holding
that defendant’s alcohol-related traffic offenses are counted under Application Note 5).
The Second Circuit took a different approach in United States v. Potes-Castillo,
638 F.3d 106 (2d Cir. 2011), holding that Application Note 5 could be read either (1) to
“mean that, like felonies, driving while ability impaired sentences are always counted,
Amendment 767
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 17
without possibility of exception” or (2) “as setting forth the direction that driving while
ability impaired sentences must not be treated as minor traffic infractions or local or-
dinance violations and excluded under section 4A1.2(c)(2).” Id. at 110–11. The Second
Circuit adopted the second reading and, accordingly, held that a prior sentence for
driving while ability impaired “should be treated like any other misdemeanor or petty
offense, except that they cannot be exempted under section 4A1.2(c)(2).” Id. at 113.
According to the Second Circuit, such a sentence can qualify for an exception, and
therefore not be counted, under the first list (e.g., if it was similar to “careless or reck-
less driving” and the other criteria for a first-list exception were met).
The amendment resolves the issue by amending Application Note 5 to clarify that con-
victions for driving while intoxicated and similar offenses are always counted, without
regard to how the offenses are classified. Further, the amendment states plainly that
paragraphs (1) and (2) of §4A1.2(c) do not apply.
This amendment reflects the Commission’s view that convictions for driving while in-
toxicated and other similar offenses are sufficiently serious to always count toward a
defendant’s criminal history score. The amendment clarifies the Commission’s intent
and should result in more consistent calculation of criminal history scores among the
circuits.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2012.
AMENDMENT 767
AMENDMENT: Section 5G1.2 is amended in subsection (b) by striking “Except as other-
wise required by law (see §5G1.1(a), (b)), the sentence imposed on each other count
shall be the total punishment as determined in accordance with Part D of Chapter
Three, and Part C of this Chapter.” and inserting “For all counts not covered by sub-
section (a), the court shall determine the total punishment and shall impose that total
punishment on each such count, except to the extent otherwise required by law.”.
The Commentary to §5G1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1, in the
first paragraph, by inserting before the period at the end of the first sentence the fol-
lowing: “and determining the defendant’s guideline range on the Sentencing Table in
Chapter Five, Part A (Sentencing Table)”; and
after the first paragraph, by inserting the following new paragraph:
“Note that the defendant’s guideline range on the Sentencing Table may be affected or
restricted by a statutorily authorized maximum sentence or a statutorily required min-
imum sentence not only in a single-count case, see §5G1.1 (Sentencing on a Single
Count of Conviction), but also in a multiple-count case. See Note 3, below.”; and
by redesignating Note 3 as Note 4 and inserting after Note 2 the following:
“3. Application of Subsection (b).—
(A) In General.—Subsection (b) provides that, for all counts not covered by
subsection (a), the court shall determine the total punishment (i.e., the
combined length of the sentences to be imposed) and shall impose that
total punishment on each such count, except to the extent otherwise
Amendment 767
18 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
required by law (such as where a statutorily required minimum sen-
tence or a statutorily authorized maximum sentence otherwise re-
quires).
(B) Effect on Guidelines Range of Mandatory Minimum or Statutory Max-
imum.—The defendant’s guideline range on the Sentencing Table may
be affected or restricted by a statutorily authorized maximum sentence
or a statutorily required minimum sentence not only in a single-count
case, see §5G1.1, but also in a multiple-count case.
In particular, where a statutorily required minimum sentence on any
count is greater than the maximum of the applicable guideline range,
the statutorily required minimum sentence on that count shall be the
guideline sentence on all counts. See §5G1.1(b). Similarly, where a
statutorily required minimum sentence on any count is greater than
the minimum of the applicable guideline range, the guideline range for
all counts is restricted by that statutorily required minimum sentence.
See §5G1.1(c)(2) and accompanying Commentary.
However, where a statutorily authorized maximum sentence on a par-
ticular count is less than the minimum of the applicable guideline
range, the sentence imposed on that count shall not be greater than
the statutorily authorized maximum sentence on that count.
See §5G1.1(a).
(C) Examples.—The following examples illustrate how subsection (b) ap-
plies, and how the restrictions in subparagraph (B) operate, when a
statutorily required minimum sentence is involved.
Defendant A and Defendant B are each convicted of the same four
counts. Counts 1, 3, and 4 have statutory maximums of 10 years,
20 years, and 2 years, respectively. Count 2 has a statutory maximum
of 30 years and a mandatory minimum of 10 years.
For Defendant A, the court determines that the final offense level is 19
and the defendant is in Criminal History Category I, which yields a
guideline range on the Sentencing Table of 30 to 37 months. Because
of the 10-year mandatory minimum on Count 2, however, Defendant
A’s guideline sentence is 120 months. See subparagraph (B), above. Af-
ter considering that guideline sentence, the court determines that the
appropriate ‘total punishment’ to be imposed on Defendant A is
120 months. Therefore, subsection (b) requires that the total punish-
ment of 120 months be imposed on each of Counts 1, 2, and 3. The sen-
tence imposed on Count 4 is limited to 24 months, because a statutory
maximum of 2 years applies to that particular count.
For Defendant B, in contrast, the court determines that the final of-
fense level is 30 and the defendant is in Criminal History Category II,
which yields a guideline range on the Sentencing Table of 108 to
135 months. Because of the 10-year mandatory minimum on Count 2,
however, Defendant B’s guideline range is restricted to 120 to
135 months. See subparagraph (B), above. After considering that re-
stricted guideline range, the court determines that the appropriate ‘to-
Amendment 767
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 19
tal punishment’ to be imposed on Defendant B is 130 months. There-
fore, subsection (b) requires that the total punishment of 130 months
be imposed on each of Counts 2 and 3. The sentences imposed on
Counts 1 and 4 are limited to 120 months (10 years) and 24 months
(2 years), respectively, because of the applicable statutory maximums.
(D) Special Rule on Resentencing.—In a case in which (i) the defendant’s
guideline range on the Sentencing Table was affected or restricted by
a statutorily required minimum sentence (as described in subpara-
graph (B)), (ii) the court is resentencing the defendant, and (iii) the
statutorily required minimum sentence no longer applies, the defend-
ant’s guideline range for purposes of the remaining counts shall be re-
determined without regard to the previous effect or restriction of the
statutorily required minimum sentence.”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to an application issue regarding
the applicable guideline range in a case in which the defendant is sentenced on multi-
ple counts of conviction, at least one of which involves a mandatory minimum sentence
that is greater than the minimum of the otherwise applicable guideline range. The
issue arises under §5G1.2 (Sentencing on Multiple Counts of Conviction) when at least
one count in a multiple-count case involves a mandatory minimum sentence that af-
fects the otherwise applicable guideline range. In such cases, circuits differ over
whether the guideline range is affected only for the count involving the mandatory
minimum or for all counts in the case.
The Fifth Circuit has held that, in such a case, the effect on the guideline range applies
to all counts in the case. See United States v. Salter, 241 F.3d 392, 395–96 (5th Cir.
2001). In that case, the guideline range on the Sentencing Table was 87 to 108 months,
but one of the three counts carried a mandatory minimum sentence of 10 years
(120 months), which resulted in a guideline sentence of 120 months. The Fifth Circuit
instructed the district court that the appropriate guideline sentence was 120 months
on each of the three counts.
The Ninth Circuit took a different approach in United States v. Evans-Martinez,
611 F.3d 635 (9th Cir. 2010), holding that, in such a case, “a mandatory minimum
sentence becomes the starting point for any count that carries a mandatory minimum
sentence higher than what would otherwise be the Guidelines sentencing range,” but
“[a]ll other counts . . . are sentenced based on the Guidelines sentencing range, regard-
less [of] the mandatory minimum sentences that apply to other counts.” See id. at 637.
The Ninth Circuit stated that it would be more “logical” to follow the Fifth Circuit’s
approach but “such logic is overcome by the precise language of the Sentencing Guide-
lines.” See id.
The District of Columbia Circuit appears to follow an approach similar to the Ninth
Circuit. See United States v. Kennedy, 133 F.3d 53, 60–61 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (one of two
counts carried a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment; district court treated life
imprisonment as the guidelines sentence for both counts; Court of Appeals reversed,
holding that the appropriate guidelines range for the other count was 262 to
327 months).
The amendment adopts the approach followed by the Fifth Circuit and makes three
changes to §5G1.2. First, it amends §5G1.2(b) to clarify that the court is to determine
the total punishment and impose that total punishment on each count, except to the
extent otherwise required by law.
Amendment 768
20 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Second, it amends the Commentary to clarify that the defendant’s guideline range in
a multiple-count case may be restricted by a mandatory minimum penalty or statutory
maximum penalty (i.e., a mandatory minimum may increase the bottom of the other-
wise applicable guideline range and a statutory maximum may decrease the top of the
otherwise applicable guideline range) in a manner similar to how the guideline range
in a single-count case may be restricted by a minimum or maximum penalty under
§5G1.1 (Sentencing on a Single Count of Conviction). Specifically, it clarifies that when
any count involves a mandatory minimum that restricts the defendant’s guideline
range, the guideline range is restricted as to all counts. It also provides examples of
how these restrictions operate.
Third, it amends the commentary to clarify that in a case in which (1) a defendant’s
guideline range was affected or restricted by a mandatory minimum penalty, (2) the
court is resentencing the defendant, and (3) the mandatory minimum sentence no
longer applies, the court shall redetermine the defendant’s guideline range for pur-
poses of the remaining counts without regard to the mandatory minimum penalty.
These changes resolve the application issue by clarifying the manner in which the
Commission intended this guideline to operate, and by providing examples similar to
those used in training probation officers and judges. When there is only one count, the
guidelines provide a single guideline range, and that range may be restricted if a man-
datory minimum is involved, as described in §5G1.1 (Sentencing on a Single Count of
Conviction). When there is more than one count, the guidelines also provide a single
guideline range, and that range also may be restricted if a mandatory minimum is
involved. These changes provide clarity and consistency for cases in which a manda-
tory minimum is present and are intended to ensure that sentencing courts resolve
multiple-count cases in a straightforward, logical manner, with a single guideline
range, a single set of findings and reasons, and a single set of departure and variance
considerations.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2012.
AMENDMENT 768
AMENDMENT: Chapter Five, Part K, Subpart 2 is amended by striking §5K2.19 and its
accompanying commentary as follows:
“§5K2.19. Post-Sentencing Rehabilitative Efforts (Policy Statement)
Post-sentencing rehabilitative efforts, even if exceptional, undertaken
by a defendant after imposition of a term of imprisonment for the in-
stant offense are not an appropriate basis for a downward departure
when resentencing the defendant for that offense. (Such efforts may
provide a basis for early termination of supervised release under
18 U.S.C. § 3583(e)(1).)
Commentary
Background: The Commission has determined that post-sentencing rehabilitative
measures should not provide a basis for downward departure when resentencing a de-
fendant initially sentenced to a term of imprisonment because such a departure would
Amendment 769
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 21
(1) be inconsistent with the policies established by Congress under 18 U.S.C. § 3624(b)
and other statutory provisions for reducing the time to be served by an imprisoned
person; and (2) inequitably benefit only those who gain the opportunity to be resen-
tenced de novo.”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: The Commission’s policy statement at §5K2.19 (Post-Sen-
tencing Rehabilitative Efforts) (Policy Statement) prohibits the consideration of post-
sentencing rehabilitative efforts as a basis for downward departure when resentencing
a defendant. Section 5K2.19 was promulgated in 2000 in response to a circuit conflict
regarding whether sentencing courts may consider such rehabilitative efforts while in
prison or on probation as a basis for downward departure at resentencing following an
appeal. See USSG App. C, Amendment 602 (effective November 1, 2000). This amend-
ment repeals §5K2.19. The amendment responds to the Supreme Court’s decision in
Pepper v. United States, 131 S. Ct. 1229 (2011), which, in part relying on 18 U.S.C.
§ 3661, held among other things that “when a defendant’s sentence has been set aside
on appeal, a district court at resentencing may consider evidence of the defendant’s
postsentencing rehabilitation.” The amendment repeals the policy statement in light
of the Pepper decision.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2012.
AMENDMENT 769
AMENDMENT: Section 2P1.2 is amended in subsection (a)(3) by inserting after “cur-
rency,” the following: “a mobile phone or similar device,”.
The Commentary to §2P1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended by redesignating
Notes 1 and 2 as Notes 2 and 3, respectively, and by inserting at the beginning the
following:
“1. In this guideline, the term ‘mobile phone or similar device’ means a phone or
other device as described in 18 U.S.C. § 1791(d)(1)(F).”.
The Commentary to §2T2.1 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by inserting
“15 U.S.C. § 377,” before “26 U.S.C.”.
The Commentary to §2T2.2 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by inserting
“15 U.S.C. § 377,” before “26 U.S.C.”.
Appendix A (Statutory Index) is amended by inserting after the line referenced to
15 U.S.C. § 158 the following:
“15 U.S.C. § 377 2T2.1, 2T2.2”;
by inserting after the line referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 43 the following:
“18 U.S.C. § 48 2G3.1”;
by inserting after the line referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 1153 the following:
“18 U.S.C. § 1158 2B1.1, 2B5.3
Amendment 769
22 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
18 U.S.C. § 1159 2B1.1”;
by inserting after the line referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 1716D the following:
“18 U.S.C. § 1716E 2T2.2”; and
by striking the lines referenced to 41 U.S.C. § 53, 54, and 423(e) as follows:
“41 U.S.C. § 53 2B4.1
41 U.S.C. § 54 2B4.1
41 U.S.C. § 423(e) 2B1.1, 2C1.1”; and by inserting the following:
“41 U.S.C. § 2102 2B1.1, 2C1.1
41 U.S.C. § 2105 2B1.1, 2C1.1
41 U.S.C. § 8702 2B4.1
41 U.S.C. § 8707 2B4.1”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to miscellaneous issues arising
from recently enacted legislation.
Cell Phone Contraband Act of 2010
First, the amendment responds to the Cell Phone Contraband Act of 2010, Pub. L.
111–225 (enacted August 10, 2010), which amended 18 U.S.C. § 1791 (Providing or
possessing contraband in prison) to make it a class A misdemeanor to provide a mobile
phone or similar device to an inmate, or for an inmate to possess a mobile phone or
similar device. Offenses under section 1791 are referenced in Appendix A (Statutory
Index) to §2P1.2 (Providing or Possessing Contraband in Prison). The penalty struc-
ture of section 1791 is based on the type of contraband involved, and the other class A
misdemeanors in section 1791 receive a base offense level of 6 in §2P1.2. Under the
amendment, the class A misdemeanor in section 1791 that applies when the contra-
band is a cell phone will also receive a base offense level of 6 in §2P1.2. This change
maintains the relationship between the penalty structures of the statute and the
guideline.
Prevent All Cigarette Trafficking Act of 2009
Second, the amendment responds to the Prevent All Cigarette Trafficking Act of 2009
(PACT Act), Pub. L. 111–154 (enacted March 31, 2010). The PACT Act made a series
of revisions to the Jenkins Act, 15 U.S.C. § 375 et seq., which is one of several laws
governing the sale, shipment and taxation of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco.
The PACT Act raised the criminal penalty at 15 U.S.C. § 377 for a knowing violation
of the Jenkins Act from a misdemeanor to a felony with a statutory maximum term of
imprisonment of 3 years. The amendment amends Appendix A (Statutory Index) to
reference section 377 offenses to §2T2.1 (Non-Payment of Taxes) and §2T2.2 (Regula-
tory Offenses). These two guidelines are the most analogous guidelines for a sec-
tion 377 offense because the offense may involve either non-payment of taxes or regu-
latory offenses. Accordingly, the amendment also amends the Commentary to §§2T2.1
Amendment 769
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 23
and 2T2.2 to add section 377 to their lists of statutory provisions. These lists indicate
that §2T2.1 applies if the conduct constitutes non-payment, evasion, or attempted eva-
sion of taxes, and §2T2.2 applies if the conduct is tantamount to a record-keeping vio-
lation rather than an effort to evade payment of taxes.
The PACT Act also created a new class A misdemeanor at 18 U.S.C. § 1716E, prohib-
iting the knowing shipment of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco through the United
States mail. The amendment amends Appendix A (Statutory Index) to reference sec-
tion 1716E offenses to §2T2.2. Section 2T2.2 is the most analogous guideline because
offenses under section 1716E are regulatory offenses.
Animal Crush Video Prohibition Act of 2010
Third, the amendment responds to the Animal Crush Video Prohibition Act of 2010,
Pub. L. 111–294 (enacted December 9, 2010), which substantially revised the criminal
offense at 18 U.S.C. § 48 (Animal crush videos). Section 48 makes it a crime to create
or distribute an “animal crush video,” which is defined by the statute in a manner that
requires, among other things, that the depiction be obscene. The maximum term of
imprisonment for a section 48 offense is 7 years. The amendment amends Appendix A
(Statutory Index) to reference section 48 offenses to §2G3.1 (Importing, Mailing, or
Transporting Obscene Matter; Transferring Obscene Matter to a Minor; Misleading
Domain Names). Section 2G3.1 is the most analogous guideline because obscenity is
an element of section 48 offenses.
Indian Arts and Crafts Amendments Act of 2010
Fourth, the amendment responds to the Indian Arts and Crafts Amendments Act of
2010, Pub. L. 111–211 (enacted July 29, 2010), which amended the criminal offense at
18 U.S.C. § 1159 (Misrepresentation of Indian produced goods and services) to reduce
penalties for first offenders when the value of the goods involved is less than $1,000.
The maximum term of imprisonment under section 1159 had been 5 years for a first
offender and 15 years for a repeat offender. The Act retained this penalty structure,
except that the statutory maximum term of imprisonment for a first offender was re-
duced to 1 year in a case in which the value of the goods involved is less than $1,000.
The amendment amends Appendix A (Statutory Index) to reference section 1159 of-
fenses to §2B1.1 (Theft, Property Destruction, and Fraud). Section 2B1.1 is the most
analogous guideline because an offense under section 1159 has elements of fraud and
deceit.
The amendment also addresses an existing offense, 18 U.S.C. § 1158 (Counterfeiting
Indian Arts and Crafts Board trade mark), which makes it a crime to counterfeit or
unlawfully affix a Government trademark used or devised by the Indian Arts and
Crafts Board or to make any false statement for the purpose of obtaining the use of
any such mark. The maximum term of imprisonment under section 1158 is 5 years for
a first offender and 15 years for a repeat offender. The amendment amends Appendix A
(Statutory Index) to reference section 1158 offenses to both §§2B1.1 and 2B5.3 (Crim-
inal Infringement of Copyright or Trademark). These two guidelines are the most anal-
ogous guidelines because an offense under section 1158 contains alternative sets of
elements, one of which involves trademark infringement and one of which involves
false statements.
Amendment 770
24 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Public Contracting Offenses
Finally, the amendment responds to Public Law 111–350 (enacted January 4, 2011),
which enacted certain laws relating to public contracts as a new positive-law title of
the Code — title 41, “Public Contracts.” As part of this codification, two criminal of-
fenses, 41 U.S.C. §§ 53 and 423(a)–(b), and their respective penalty provisions,
41 U.S.C. §§ 54 and 423(e), were given new title 41 section numbers: sections 8702 and
8707 for sections 53 and 54, respectively, and sections 2102 and 2105 for sec-
tions 423(a)–(b) and 423(e), respectively. The substantive offenses and their related
penalties did not change. The amendment makes changes to Appendix A (Statutory
Index) to reflect the renumbering and includes a reference for the new section 2102,
whose predecessor section 423(a)–(b) was not referenced in Appendix A. The changes
are technical.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2012.
AMENDMENT 770
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §1B1.10 captioned “Application Notes” is amended
in Note 4 by striking “Application Note 10 to §2D1.1” and inserting “the Drug Equiva-
lency Tables in the Commentary to §2D1.1 (see §2D1.1, comment. (n.8))”.
The Commentary to §2D1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended by renumbering
Notes 1 through 29 according to the following table:
Before Amendment After Amendment
1 1
17 2
13 3
2 4
12 5
5 6
6 7
10 8
11 9
15 10
3 11
18 12
23 13
Amendment 770
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 25
25 14
26 15
27 16
28 17
19 18(A)
20 18(B)
29 19
21 20
24 21
8 22
7 23
22 24
4 25
14 26(A)
16 26(B)
9 26(C);
and by rearranging those Notes, as so renumbered, to place them in proper numerical
order.
The Commentary to §2D1.1 captioned “Application Notes”, as so renumbered and re-
arranged, is further amended by inserting headings at the beginning of certain notes,
as follows (with Notes referred to by their new numbers):
Note Heading to Be Inserted at the Beginning
1 “Mixture or Substance”.—
2 “Plant”.—
3 Classification of Controlled Substances.—
4 Applicability to “Counterfeit” Substances.—
5 Determining Drug Types and Drug Quantities.—
7 Multiple Transactions or Multiple Drug Types.—
Amendment 770
26 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
9 Determining Quantity Based on Doses, Pills, or Capsules.—
10 Determining Quantity of LSD.—
12 Application of Subsection (b)(5).—
18 Application of Subsection (b)(13).—
23 Cases Involving Mandatory Minimum Penalties.—
25 Cases Involving “Small Amount of Marihuana for No Remuneration”.—
26 Departure Considerations.—
26(A) Downward Departure Based on Drug Quantity in Certain Reverse Sting Op-
erations.—
26(B) Upward Departure Based on Drug Quantity.—
26(C) Upward Departure Based on Unusually High Purity.—
The Commentary to §2D1.1 captioned “Application Notes”, as so renumbered and re-
arranged and amended, is further amended as follows (with Notes referred to by their
new numbers):
in Note 8(A) by striking “Note 5” and inserting “Note 6”;
in Note 15 by redesignating (i), (ii), and (iii) as (A), (B), and (C), respectively;
in Note 18(A) by inserting before the period at the end of the heading the following:
“(Subsection (b)(13)(A))”; and
in Note 18(B) by inserting before the period at the end of the heading the following:
“(Subsection (b)(13)(C)B(D))”, by redesignating its component subdivision (A) (begin-
ning “Factors to Consider”) as (i), and that subdivision’s component subdivisions (i)
through (iv) as (I) through (IV), respectively, and by redesignating its component sub-
division (B) (beginning “Definitions”) as (ii).
The Commentary to §2D1.1 captioned “Background” is amended by striking the fifth
through eighth undesignated paragraphs as follows:
“ The last sentence of subsection (a)(5) implements the directive to the Commis-
sion in section 7(1) of Public Law 111–220.
Subsection (b)(2) implements the directive to the Commission in section 5 of
Public Law 111–220.
Subsection (b)(3) is derived from Section 6453 of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act
of 1988.
Frequently, a term of supervised release to follow imprisonment is required by
statute for offenses covered by this guideline. Guidelines for the imposition, duration,
and conditions of supervised release are set forth in Chapter Five, Part D (Supervised
Release).”;
Amendment 770
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 27
in the paragraph beginning “The dosage weight” by striking “111 S.Ct. 1919” and in-
serting “500 U.S. 453”; and
by inserting before the paragraph beginning “Subsection (b)(11)” the following:
“ Frequently, a term of supervised release to follow imprisonment is required
by statute for offenses covered by this guideline. Guidelines for the imposition, dura-
tion, and conditions of supervised release are set forth in Chapter Five, Part D (Super-
vised Release).
The last sentence of subsection (a)(5) implements the directive to the Commis-
sion in section 7(1) of Public Law 111–220.
Subsection (b)(2) implements the directive to the Commission in section 5 of
Public Law 111–220.
Subsection (b)(3) is derived from Section 6453 of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act
of 1988.”.
The Commentary to §2D1.6 captioned “Application Note” is amended in Note 1 by
striking “Note 12” and inserting “Note 5”.
The Commentary to §2D1.11 captioned “Application Notes”, as amended by Amend-
ment 763, is further amended by renumbering Notes 1 through 9 according to the fol-
lowing table:
Before Amendment After Amendment
4 1
1 2
5 3
6 4
7 5
8 6
9 7
2 8
3 9;
and by rearranging those Notes, as so renumbered, to place them in proper numerical
order.
The Commentary to §2D1.11 captioned “Application Notes”, as so renumbered and re-
arranged, is further amended by inserting headings at the beginning of certain notes,
as follows (with Notes referred to by their new numbers):
Amendment 770
28 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Note Heading to Be Inserted at the Beginning
2 Application of Subsection (b)(1).—
3 Application of Subsection (b)(2).—
4 Application of Subsection (b)(3).—
8 Application of Subsection (c)(1).—
9 Offenses Involving Immediate Precursors or Other Controlled Substances
Covered Under §2D1.1.—
The Commentary to §2D1.11 captioned “Application Notes”, as so renumbered and re-
arranged and amended, is further amended in Note 9 (as so renumbered) by striking
“Note 12” and inserting “Note 5”.
The Commentary to §5G1.2 captioned “Application Notes”, as amended by Note 767,
is further amended by amending Note 1 to read as follows:
“1. In General.—This section specifies the procedure for determining the specific
sentence to be formally imposed on each count in a multiple-count case. The
combined length of the sentences (‘total punishment’) is determined by the
court after determining the adjusted combined offense level and the Criminal
History Category and determining the defendant’s guideline range on the Sen-
tencing Table in Chapter Five, Part A (Sentencing Table).
Note that the defendant’s guideline range on the Sentencing Table may be af-
fected or restricted by a statutorily authorized maximum sentence or a statu-
torily required minimum sentence not only in a single-count case, see §5G1.1
(Sentencing on a Single Count of Conviction), but also in a multiple-count case.
See Note 3, below.
Except as otherwise required by subsection (e) or any other law, the total pun-
ishment is to be imposed on each count and the sentences on all counts are to
be imposed to run concurrently to the extent allowed by the statutory maxi-
mum sentence of imprisonment for each count of conviction.
This section applies to multiple counts of conviction (A) contained in the same
indictment or information, or (B) contained in different indictments or infor-
mations for which sentences are to be imposed at the same time or in a consol-
idated proceeding.
Usually, at least one of the counts will have a statutory maximum adequate to
permit imposition of the total punishment as the sentence on that count. The
sentence on each of the other counts will then be set at the lesser of the total
punishment and the applicable statutory maximum, and be made to run con-
currently with all or part of the longest sentence. If no count carries an ade-
quate statutory maximum, consecutive sentences are to be imposed to the ex-
tent necessary to achieve the total punishment.”.
Section 5K2.0 is amended in subsection (d)(1) by striking “the last sentence of 5K2.12
(Coercion and Duress), and 5K2.19 (Post-Sentencing Rehabilitative Efforts)” and in-
serting “and the last sentence of 5K2.12 (Coercion and Duress)”.
Amendment 771
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 29
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment makes certain technical and conforming
changes to commentary in the Guidelines Manual.
First, it reorganizes the commentary to the drug trafficking guideline, §2D1.1 (Unlaw-
ful Manufacturing, Importing, Exporting, or Trafficking (Including Possession with In-
tent to Commit These Offenses); Attempt or Conspiracy), so that the order of the ap-
plication notes better reflects the order of the guidelines provisions to which they re-
late. The amendment also makes stylistic changes to the Commentary to §2D1.1, such
as by adding headings to certain application notes. To reflect the renumbering of ap-
plication notes in §2D1.1, conforming changes are also made to the Commentary to
§1B1.10 and §2D1.6.
Second, it makes certain clerical and stylistic changes in connection with certain re-
cently promulgated amendments. See 77 Fed. Reg. 28226 (May 11, 2012). The clerical
and stylistic changes are as follows:
(1) Amendment 763 made revisions to §2D1.11 (Unlawfully Distributing, Import-
ing, Exporting or Possessing a Listed Chemical; Attempt or Conspiracy). This
amendment reorganizes the commentary to §2D1.11 so that the order of the
application notes better reflects the order of the guidelines provisions to which
they relate. The amendment also makes stylistic changes to the Commentary
to §2D1.11 by adding headings to certain application notes.
(2) Amendment 767 made revisions to §5G1.2 (Sentencing on Multiple Counts of
Conviction), including a revision to Application Note 1. However, the amenda-
tory instructions published in the Federal Register to implement those revi-
sions included an erroneous instruction. This amendment restates Application
Note 1 in its entirety to ensure that it conforms with the version of Application
Note 1 that appears in the unofficial, “reader-friendly” version of Amendment 7
that the Commission made available in May 2012.
(3) Amendment 768 repealed the policy statement at §5K2.19 (Post-Sentencing
Rehabilitative Efforts). However, a reference to that policy statement is con-
tained in §5K2.0 (Grounds for Departure). This amendment revises §5K2.0 to
reflect the repeal of §5K2.19.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2012.
AMENDMENT 771
AMENDMENT: Section 2B1.1(b) is amended by striking paragraph (5) as follows:
“(5) If the offense involved misappropriation of a trade secret and the defendant
knew or intended that the offense would benefit a foreign government, foreign
instrumentality, or foreign agent, increase by 2 levels.”;
by renumbering paragraphs (6) through (8) as (5) through (7); by renumbering para-
graphs (13) through (18) as (14) through (19); by inserting after paragraph (12) the
following:
Amendment 771
30 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
“(13) (Apply the greater) If the offense involved misappropriation of a trade secret
and the defendant knew or intended—
(A) that the trade secret would be transported or transmitted out of the
United States, increase by 2 levels; or
(B) that the offense would benefit a foreign government, foreign instru-
mentality, or foreign agent, increase by 4 levels.
If subparagraph (B) applies and the resulting offense level is less than level 14,
increase to level 14.”; and
in paragraph (16) (as so renumbered) by striking “(b)(15)(B)” and inserting “(b)(16)(B)”.
The Commentary to §2B1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 6 by
striking “(b)(7)” both places it appears and inserting “(b)(6)”; in Note 10 by striking
“(b)(13)” both places it appears and inserting “(b)(14)”; in Note 11 by striking
“(b)(15)(A)” both places it appears and inserting “(b)(16)(A)”; in Note 12 by striking
“(b)(15)(B)” and inserting “(b)(16)(B)”; in Note 12(A) by striking “(b)(15)(B)(i)” and in-
serting “(b)(16)(B)(i)”; in Note 12(B) by striking “(b)(15)(B)(ii)” and inserting
“(b)(16)(B)(ii)”; in Note 13 by striking “(b)(17)” both places it appears and inserting
“(b)(18)”; in Note 13(B) by striking “(b)(17)(A)(iii)” both places it appears and inserting
“(b)(18)(A)(iii)”, and by striking “(b)(15)(B)” both places it appears and inserting
“(b)(16)(B)”; in Note 14 by striking “(b)(18)” each place it appears and inserting
“(b)(19)”; and in Note 19(B) by striking “(b)(17)(A)(iii)” and inserting “(b)(18)(A)(iii)”.
The Commentary to §2B1.1 captioned “Background” is amended by striking “(b)(6)”,
“(b)(8)”, “(b)(14)(B)”, “(b)(15)(A)”, “(b)(15)(B)(i)”, “(b)(16)”, “(b)(17)”, and “(b)(17)(B)” and
inserting “(b)(5)”, “(b)(7)”, “(b)(15)(B)”, “(b)(16)(A)”, “(b)(16)(B)(i)”, “(b)(17)”, “(b)(18)”,
and “(b)(18)(B)”, respectively; and by inserting before the paragraph that begins “Sub-
section (b)(15)(B)” (as so amended) the following:
“ Subsection (b)(13) implements the directive in section 3 of Public
Law 112–269.”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to section 3 of the Foreign and
Economic Espionage Penalty Enhancement Act of 2012, Pub. L. 112–269 (enacted Jan-
uary 14, 2013), which contains a directive to the Commission regarding offenses in-
volving stolen trade secrets or economic espionage.
Section 3(a) of the Act directs the Commission to “review and, if appropriate, amend”
the guidelines “applicable to persons convicted of offenses relating to the transmission
or attempted transmission of a stolen trade secret outside of the United States or eco-
nomic espionage, in order to reflect the intent of Congress that penalties for such of-
fenses under the Federal sentencing guidelines and policy statements appropriately
reflect the seriousness of these offenses, account for the potential and actual harm
caused by these offenses, and provide adequate deterrence against such offenses.” Sec-
tion 3(b) of the Act states that, in carrying out the directive, the Commission shall
consider, among other things, whether the guidelines adequately address the simple
misappropriation of a trade secret; the transmission or attempted transmission of a
stolen trade secret outside of the United States; and the transmission or attempted
transmission of a stolen trade secret outside of the United States that is committed or
attempted to be committed for the benefit of a foreign government, foreign instrumen-
tality, or foreign agent.
Amendment 771
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 31
The offenses described in the directive may be prosecuted under 18 U.S.C. § 1831 (Eco-
nomic espionage), which requires that the defendant specifically intend or know that
the offense “will benefit any foreign government, foreign instrumentality, or foreign
agent,” and 18 U.S.C. § 1832 (Theft of trade secrets), which does not require such spe-
cific intent or knowledge. The statutory maximum terms of imprisonment are 15 years
for a section 1831 offense and 10 years for a section 1832 offense. Both offenses are
referenced in Appendix A (Statutory Index) to §2B1.1 (Theft, Property Destruction,
and Fraud).
In response to the directive, the amendment revises the existing specific offense char-
acteristic at §2B1.1(b)(5), which provides an enhancement of two levels “[i]f the offense
involved misappropriation of a trade secret and the defendant knew or intended that
the offense would benefit a foreign government, foreign instrumentality, or foreign
agent,” in two ways. First, it broadens the scope of the enhancement to provide a 2-
level increase for trade secret offenses in which the defendant knew or intended that
the trade secret would be transported or transmitted out of the United States. Second,
it increases the severity of the enhancement to provide a 4-level enhancement and a
minimum offense level of 14 for trade secret offenses in which the defendant knew or
intended that the offense would benefit a foreign government, foreign instrumentality,
or foreign agent. The enhancement also is redesignated as subsection (b)(13).
In responding to the directive, the Commission consulted with individuals or groups
representing law enforcement, owners of trade secrets, victims of economic espionage
offenses, the United States Department of Justice, the United States Department of
Homeland Security, the United States Department of State, the Office of the United
States Trade Representative, the Federal Public and Community Defenders, and
standing advisory groups, among others. The Commission also considered relevant
data and literature.
The Commission received public comment and testimony that the transmission of sto-
len trade secrets outside of the United States creates significant obstacles to effective
investigation and prosecution and causes both increased harm to victims and more
general harms to the nation. With respect to the victim, civil remedies may not be
readily available or effective, and the transmission of a stolen trade secret outside of
the United States substantially increases the risk that the trade secret will be ex-
ploited by a foreign competitor. In contrast, the simple movement of a stolen trade
secret within a domestic multinational company (e.g., from a United States office to an
overseas office of the same company) may not pose the same risks or harms. More
generally, the Commission heard that foreign actors increasingly target United States
companies for trade secret theft and that such offenses pose a growing threat to the
nation’s global competitiveness, economic growth, and national security. Accordingly,
the Commission determined that a 2-level enhancement is warranted for cases in
which the defendant knew or intended that a stolen trade secret would be transported
or transmitted outside of the United States.
The Commission also received public comment and testimony that cases involving eco-
nomic espionage (i.e., trade secret offenses that benefit foreign governments or entities
under the substantial control of foreign governments) are particularly serious. In such
cases, the United States is unlikely to obtain a foreign government’s cooperation when
seeking relief for the victim, and offenders backed by a foreign government likely will
have significant financial resources to combat civil remedies. In addition, a foreign
government’s involvement increases the threat to the nation’s economic and national
security. Accordingly, the Commission determined that the existing enhancement for
Amendment 772
32 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
economic espionage should be increased from 2 to 4 levels and that such offenses
should be subject to a minimum offense level of 14. This heightened enhancement is
consistent with the higher statutory maximum penalties and fines applicable to such
offenses and the Commission’s established treatment of economic espionage as a more
serious form of trade secret theft.
Consistent with the directive, the Commission also considered whether the guidelines
appropriately account for the simple misappropriation of a trade secret. The Commis-
sion determined that such offenses are adequately accounted for by existing provisions
in the Guidelines Manual, such as the loss table in §2B1.1(b)(1), the sophisticated
means enhancement at §2B1.1(b)(10), and the adjustment for abuse of position of trust
or use of special skill at §3B1.3.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2013.
AMENDMENT 772
AMENDMENT: Section 2B1.1 is amended by inserting before paragraph (9) the following
new paragraph:
“(8) (Apply the greater) If—
(A) the offense involved conduct described in 18 U.S.C. § 670, increase by
2 levels; or
(B) the offense involved conduct described in 18 U.S.C. § 670, and the de-
fendant was employed by, or was an agent of, an organization in the
supply chain for the pre-retail medical product, increase by 4 levels.”;
The Commentary to §2B1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
inserting after the paragraph that begins “ ‘Personal information’ means” the follow-
ing:
“ ‘Pre-retail medical product’ has the meaning given that term in 18 U.S.C. § 670(e).”;
and by inserting after the paragraph that begins “ ‘Publicly traded company’ means”
the following:
“ ‘Supply chain’ has the meaning given that term in 18 U.S.C. § 670(e).”;
in Note 3(F)(i) by striking “Note 9(A)” and inserting “Note 10(A)”; and
by renumbering Notes 7 through 19 as 8 through 20; by inserting after Note 6 the
following:
“7. Application of Subsection (b)(8)(B).—If subsection (b)(8)(B) applies, do not ap-
ply an adjustment under §3B1.3 (Abuse of Position of Trust or Use of Special
Skill).”; and
in Note 20 (as so renumbered) by adding at the end of subparagraph (A)(ii) as the last
sentence the following: “Similarly, an upward departure would be warranted in a case
involving conduct described in 18 U.S.C. § 670 if the offense resulted in serious bodily
Amendment 772
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 33
injury or death, including serious bodily injury or death resulting from the use of the
pre-retail medical product.”.
The Commentary to §2B1.1 captioned “Background” is amended by inserting before
the paragraph that begins “Subsection (b)(9)(D)” the following:
“ Subsection (b)(8) implements the directive to the Commission in section 7 of
Public Law 112–186.”.
However, if §2B1.1(b) already contains a paragraph (8) because the renumbering of
paragraphs by Amendment 771 has not taken effect, renumber the new paragraph
inserted into §2B1.1(b) as paragraph (8A) rather than paragraph (8), and revise the
Commentary so that the new Note 7 inserted into the Application Notes and the new
paragraph inserted into the Background refer to subsection (b)(8A) rather than sub-
section (b)(8).
Appendix A (Statutory Index) is amended by inserting after the line referenced to
18 U.S.C. § 669 the following:
“18 U.S.C. § 670 2B1.1”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to the Strengthening and Focus-
ing Enforcement to Deter Organized Stealing and Enhance Safety Act of 2012, Pub.
L. 112–186 (enacted October 5, 2012) (the “Act”), which addressed various offenses in-
volving “pre-retail medical products,” defined as “a medical product that has not yet
been made available for retail purchase by a consumer.” The Act created a new crimi-
nal offense at 18 U.S.C. § 670 for theft of pre-retail medical products, increased statu-
tory penalties for certain related offenses when a pre-retail medical product is in-
volved, and contained a directive to the Commission.
New Offense at 18 U.S.C. § 670
The new offense at section 670 makes it unlawful for any person in (or using any means
or facility of) interstate or foreign commerce to—
(1) embezzle, steal, or by fraud or deception obtain, or
knowingly and unlawfully take, carry away, or conceal
a pre-retail medical product;
(2) knowingly and falsely make, alter, forge, or counterfeit
the labeling or documentation (including documenta-
tion relating to origination or shipping) of a pre-retail
medical product;
(3) knowingly possess, transport, or traffic in a pre-retail
medical product that was involved in a violation of par-
agraph (1) or (2);
(4) with intent to defraud, buy, or otherwise obtain, a
pre-retail medical product that has expired or been sto-
len;
(5) with intent to defraud, sell, or distribute, a pre-retail
medical product that is expired or stolen; or
Amendment 772
34 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
(6) attempt or conspire to violate any of paragraphs (1)
through (5).
The offense generally carries a statutory maximum term of imprisonment of three
years. If the offense is an “aggravated offense,” however, higher statutory maximum
terms of imprisonment are provided. The offense is an “aggravated offense” if—
(1) the defendant is employed by, or is an agent of, an or-
ganization in the supply chain for the pre-retail medi-
cal product; or
(2) the violation—
(A) involves the use of violence, force, or a threat of
violence or force;
(B) involves the use of a deadly weapon;
(C) results in serious bodily injury or death, includ-
ing serious bodily injury or death resulting
from the use of the medical product involved; or
(D) is subsequent to a prior conviction for an of-
fense under section 670.
Specifically, the higher statutory maximum terms of imprisonment are:
(1) Five years, if—
(A) the defendant is employed by, or is an agent of,
an organization in the supply chain for the pre-
retail medical product; or
(B) the violation (i) involves the use of violence,
force, or a threat of violence or force, (ii) in-
volves the use of a deadly weapon, or (iii) is sub-
sequent to a prior conviction for an offense un-
der section 670.
(2) 15 years, if the value of the medical products involved
in the offense is $5,000 or greater.
(3) 20 years, if both (1) and (2) apply.
(4) 30 years, if the offense results in serious bodily injury
or death, including serious bodily injury or death re-
sulting from the use of the medical product involved.
The amendment amends Appendix A (Statutory Index) to reference the new offense at
18 U.S.C. § 670 to §2B1.1 (Theft, Property Destruction, and Fraud). The Commission
concluded that §2B1.1 is the appropriate guideline because the elements of the new
offense include theft or fraud.
Response to Directive
Section 7 of the Act directs the Commission to “review and, if appropriate, amend” the
federal sentencing guidelines and policy statements applicable to the new offense and
the related offenses “to reflect the intent of Congress that penalties for such offenses
Amendment 772
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 35
be sufficient to deter and punish such offenses, and appropriately account for the ac-
tual harm to the public from these offenses.” The amendment amends §2B1.1 to ad-
dress offenses involving pre-retail medical products in two ways.
First, the amendment adds a new specific offense characteristic at §2B1.1(b)(8) that
provides a two-pronged enhancement with an instruction to apply the greater.
Prong (A) provides a 2-level enhancement if the offense involved conduct described in
18 U.S.C. § 670. Prong (B) provides a 4-level enhancement if the offense involved con-
duct described in 18 U.S.C. § 670 and the defendant was employed by, or an agent of,
an organization in the supply chain for the pre-retail product. Accompanying this new
specific offense characteristic is new Commentary providing that, if prong (B) applies,
“do not apply an adjustment under §3B1.3 (Abuse of Position of Trust or Use of Special
Skill).”
Based on public comment, testimony and sentencing data, the Commission concluded
that an enhancement differentiating fraud and theft offenses involving medical prod-
ucts from those involving other products is warranted by the additional risk such of-
fenses pose to public health and safety. In addition, such offenses undermine the pub-
lic’s confidence in the medical regulatory and distribution system. The Commission
also concluded that the risks and harms it identified would be present in any theft or
fraud offense involving a pre-retail medical product, regardless of the offense of con-
viction. Therefore application of the new specific offense characteristic is not limited to
offenses charged under 18 U.S.C. § 670.
The amendment provides a 4-level enhancement for defendants who commit such of-
fenses while employed in the supply chain for the pre-retail medical product. Such
defendants are subject to an increased statutory maximum and the Commission deter-
mined that a heightened enhancement should apply to reflect the likelihood that the
defendant’s position in the supply chain facilitated the commission or concealment of
the offense. Defendants who receive the 4-level enhancement are not subject to the
adjustment at §3B1.3 because the new enhancement adequately accounts for the con-
cerns covered by §3B1.3. The Commission determined that existing specific offense
characteristics generally account for other aggravating factors included in the Act,
such as loss, use or threat of force, risk of death or serious bodily injury, and weapon
involvement, and therefore additional new specific offense characteristics are not nec-
essary. See, e.g., §§2B1.1(b)(1), (b)(3), and (b)(15) (as redesignated by the amendment).
Second, it amends the upward departure provisions in the Commentary to §2B1.1 at
Application Note 19(A) to provide — as an example of a case in which an upward de-
parture would be warranted — a case “involving conduct described in 18 U.S.C. § 670
if the offense resulted in serious bodily injury or death, including serious bodily injury
or death resulting from the use of the pre-retail medical product.” Public comment and
testimony indicated that §2B1.1 may not adequately account for the harm created by
theft or fraud offenses involving pre-retail medical products when such serious bodily
injury or death actually occurs as a result of the offense. For example, some pre-retail
medical products are stolen as part of a scheme to re-sell them into the supply chain,
but if the products have not been properly stored in the interim, their subsequent use
can seriously injure the individual consumers who buy and use them. Thus, the amend-
ment expands the scope of the existing upward departure provision to address such
harms and to clarify that an upward departure is appropriate in such cases not only if
serious bodily injury or death occurred during the theft or fraud, but also if such seri-
ous bodily injury or death resulted from the victim’s use of a pre-retail medical product
that had previously been obtained by theft or fraud.
Amendment 773
36 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Finally, the amendment amends the Commentary to §2B1.1 to provide relevant defi-
nitions and make other conforming changes.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2013.
AMENDMENT 773
AMENDMENT: Section 2B5.3(b) is amended by renumbering paragraph (5) as (6); by
inserting after paragraph (4) the following:
“(5) If the offense involved a counterfeit drug, increase by 2 levels.”; and
by inserting after paragraph (6) (as so renumbered) the following:
“(7) If the offense involved a counterfeit military good or service the use, malfunc-
tion, or failure of which is likely to cause (A) the disclosure of classified infor-
mation; (B) impairment of combat operations; or (C) other significant harm to
(i) a combat operation, (ii) a member of the Armed Forces, or (iii) national se-
curity, increase by 2 levels. If the resulting offense level is less than level 14,
increase to level 14.”.
The Commentary to §2B5.3 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
inserting after the paragraph that begins “ ‘Commercial advantage” the following:
“ ‘Counterfeit drug’ has the meaning given that term in 18 U.S.C. § 2320(f)(6).
“ ‘Counterfeit military good or service’ has the meaning given that term in 18 U.S.C.
§ 2320(f)(4).”;
by renumbering Notes 3 and 4 as 4 and 5; by inserting after Note 2 the following:
“3. Application of Subsection (b)(7).—In subsection (b)(7), ‘other significant harm
to a member of the Armed Forces’ means significant harm other than serious
bodily injury or death. In a case in which the offense involved a counterfeit
military good or service the use, malfunction, or failure of which is likely to
cause serious bodily injury or death, subsection (b)(6)(A) (conscious or reckless
risk of serious bodily injury or death) would apply.”; and
in Note 5 (as so renumbered) by adding at the end the following:
“(D) The offense resulted in death or serious bodily injury.”.
The Commentary to §2B5.3 captioned “Background” is amended by inserting after the
paragraph that begins “Subsection (b)(1)” the following:
“ Subsection (b)(5) implements the directive to the Commission in section 717
of Public Law 112–144.”.
Appendix A (Statutory Index) is amended by striking the line referenced to 21 U.S.C.
§ 333(b) as follows:
“21 U.S.C. § 333(b) 2N2.1”;
Amendment 773
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 37
and inserting the following:
“21 U.S.C. § 333(b)(1)–(6) 2N2.1
21 U.S.C. § 333(b)(7) 2N1.1”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to two recent Acts that made
changes to 18 U.S.C. § 2320 (Trafficking in counterfeit goods or services). One Act in-
creased penalties for offenses involving counterfeit military goods and services; the
other increased penalties for offenses involving counterfeit drugs and included a di-
rective to the Commission. The amendment also responds to recent statutory changes
to 21 U.S.C. § 333 (Penalties for violations of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetics
Act) that increase penalties for offenses involving intentionally adulterated drugs.
Section 2320 and Counterfeit Military Goods and Services
First, the amendment responds to changes to section 2320 made by the National De-
fense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012, Pub. L. 112–81 (enacted December 31,
2011) (the “NDAA”). In general, section 2320 prohibits trafficking in goods or services
using a counterfeit mark, and provides a statutory maximum term of imprisonment of
10 years, or 20 years for a second or subsequent offense. If the offender knowingly or
recklessly causes or attempts to cause serious bodily injury or death, the statutory
maximum is increased to 20 years or any term of years or life, respectively. Offenses
under section 2320 are referenced in Appendix A (Statutory Index) to §2B5.3 (Criminal
Infringement of Copyright or Trademark).
Section 818 of the NDAA amended section 2320 to add a new subsection (a)(3) that
prohibits trafficking in counterfeit military goods and services, the use, malfunction,
or failure of which is likely to cause serious bodily injury or death, the disclosure of
classified information, impairment of combat operations, or other significant harm to
a combat operation, a member of the Armed Forces, or national security. A “counterfeit
military good or service” is defined as a good or service that uses a counterfeit mark
and that (A) is falsely identified or labeled as meeting military specifications, or (B) is
intended for use in a military or national security application. See 18 U.S.C.
§ 2320(f)(4). An individual who commits an offense under subsection (a)(3) is subject
to a statutory maximum term of imprisonment of 20 years, or 30 years for a second or
subsequent offense. See 18 U.S.C. § 2320(b)(3).
The legislative history of the NDAA indicates that Congress amended section 2320
because of concerns about national security and the protection of United States ser-
vicemen and women. After reviewing the legislative history, public comment, testi-
mony, and data, the Commission determined that an offense involving counterfeit mil-
itary goods and services that jeopardizes the safety of United States troops and com-
promises mission effectiveness warrants increased punishment.
Specifically, the amendment addresses offenses involving counterfeit military goods
and services by amending §2B5.3 to create a new specific offense characteristic at sub-
section (b)(7). Subsection (b)(7) provides a 2-level enhancement and a minimum offense
level of 14 if the offense involves a counterfeit military good or service the use, mal-
function, or failure of which is likely to cause the disclosure of classified information,
impairment of combat operations, or other significant harm to a combat operation, a
member of the Armed Forces, or to national security. The Commission set the mini-
mum offense level at 14 so that it would be proportionate to the minimum offense level
Amendment 773
38 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
in the enhancement for “conscious or reckless risk of death or serious bodily injury” at
subsection (b)(5)(A). That enhancement is moved from (b)(5)(A) to (b)(6)(A) by the
amendment.
Although section 2320(a)(3) includes offenses that are likely to cause “serious bodily
injury or death,” the new specific offense characteristic does not because the Commis-
sion determined that such risk of harm is adequately addressed by the existing en-
hancement for offenses involving the “conscious or reckless risk of death or serious
bodily injury.” Consistent with that approach, the amendment includes commentary
providing that the “other significant harm” specified in subsection (b)(7) does not in-
clude death or serious bodily injury and that §2B5.3(b)(6)(A) would apply if the offense
involved a counterfeit military good or service the use, malfunction, or failure of which
is likely to cause serious bodily injury or death.
Section 2320 and Counterfeit Drugs
Second, the amendment responds to changes made by section 717 of the Food and Drug
Administration Safety and Innovation Act, Pub. L. 112–144 (enacted July 9, 2012) (the
“FDASIA”), which amended section 2320 to add a new subsection (a)(4) that prohibits
trafficking in a counterfeit drug. A “counterfeit drug” is a drug, as defined by section
201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. § 321), that uses a coun-
terfeit mark. See 18 U.S.C. § 2320(f)(6). An individual who commits an offense under
subsection (a)(4) is subject to the same statutory maximum term of imprisonment as
for an offense involving a counterfeit military good or service — 20 years, or 30 years
for a second or subsequent offense. See 18 U.S.C. § 2320(b)(3).
Section 717 of the FDASIA also contained a directive to the Commission to “review and
amend, if appropriate” the guidelines and policy statements applicable to persons con-
victed of an offense described in section 2320(a)(4) — i.e., offenses involving counterfeit
drugs — “in order to reflect the intent of Congress that such penalties be increased in
comparison to those currently provided by the guidelines and policy statements.”
See Pub. L. 112–144, § 717(b)(1). In addition, section 717(b)(2) provides that, in re-
sponding to the directive, the Commission shall, among other things, ensure that the
guidelines reflect the serious nature of section 2320(a)(4) offenses and consider the
extent to which the guidelines account for the potential and actual harm to the public
resulting from such offenses.
After reviewing the legislative history of the FDASIA, public comment, testimony, and
data, the Commission determined that offenses involving counterfeit drugs involve a
threat to public safety and undermine the public’s confidence in the drug supply chain.
Furthermore, unlike many other goods covered by the infringement guideline, offenses
involving counterfeit drugs circumvent a regulatory scheme established to protect the
health and safety of the public. Accordingly, the amendment responds to the directive
by adding a new specific offense characteristic at §2B5.3(b)(5) that provides a 2-level
enhancement if the offense involves a counterfeit drug.
Offenses Resulting in Death or Serious Bodily Injury
Third, the amendment amends the Commentary to §2B5.3 to add a new upward de-
parture consideration if the offense resulted in death or serious bodily injury. The ad-
dition of this departure consideration recognizes the distinction between an offense
involving the risk of death or serious bodily injury and one in which death or serious
bodily injury actually results. Departures for these reasons are already authorized in
the guidelines, see §§5K2.1 (Death) (Policy Statement), 5K2.2 (Physical Injury) (Policy
Amendment 774
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 39
Statement), but the amendment is intended to heighten awareness of the availability
of a departure in such cases.
Section 333 and Offenses Involving Intentionally Adulterated Drugs
Finally, the amendment provides a statutory reference for the new offense at 21 U.S.C.
§ 333(b)(7) created by section 716 of the FDASIA. Section 333(b)(7) applies to any per-
son who knowingly and intentionally adulterates a drug such that the drug is adulter-
ated under certain provisions of 21 U.S.C. § 351 and has a reasonable probability of
causing serious adverse health consequences or death to humans or animals. It pro-
vides a statutory maximum term of imprisonment of 20 years.
The amendment amends Appendix A (Statutory Index) to reference offenses under sec-
tion 333(b)(7) to §2N1.1 (Tampering or Attempting to Tamper Involving Risk of Death
or Bodily Injury). The Commission concluded that offenses under section 333(b)(7) are
similar to tampering offenses under 18 U.S.C. § 1365 (Tampering with consumer prod-
ucts), which are referenced to §2N1.1. In addition, the public health harms that Con-
gress intended to target in adulteration cases are similar to those targeted by viola-
tions of section 1365(a) and are best addressed under §2N1.1.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2013.
AMENDMENT 774
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §2T1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in
Note 1 by inserting “Tax Loss.—” at the beginning;
in Note 2 by inserting “Total Tax Loss Attributable to the Offense.—” at the beginning,
and by redesignating subdivisions (a) through (e) as (A) through (E);
by inserting after Note 2 the following:
“3. Unclaimed Credits, Deductions, and Exemptions.—In determining the tax
loss, the court should account for the standard deduction and personal and de-
pendent exemptions to which the defendant was entitled. In addition, the court
should account for any unclaimed credit, deduction, or exemption that is
needed to ensure a reasonable estimate of the tax loss, but only to the extent
that (A) the credit, deduction, or exemption was related to the tax offense and
could have been claimed at the time the tax offense was committed; (B) the
credit, deduction, or exemption is reasonably and practicably ascertainable;
and (C) the defendant presents information to support the credit, deduction, or
exemption sufficiently in advance of sentencing to provide an adequate oppor-
tunity to evaluate whether it has sufficient indicia of reliability to support its
probable accuracy (see §6A1.3 (Resolution of Disputed Factors) (Policy State-
ment)).
However, the court shall not account for payments to third parties made in a
manner that encouraged or facilitated a separate violation of law (e.g., ‘under
the table’ payments to employees or expenses incurred to obstruct justice).
The burden is on the defendant to establish any such credit, deduction, or ex-
emption by a preponderance of the evidence. See §6A1.3, comment.”;
Amendment 774
40 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
by striking “3. ‘Criminal activity’ means” and inserting the following:
“4. Application of Subsection (b)(1) (Criminal Activity).—‘Criminal activity’
means”;
by striking “4. Sophisticated Means Enhancement.—” and inserting the follow-
ing:
“5. Application of Subsection (b)(2) (Sophisticated Means).—”;
by striking Notes 5 and 6 as follows:
“5. A ‘credit claimed against tax’ is an item that reduces the amount of tax directly.
In contrast, a ‘deduction’ is an item that reduces the amount of taxable income.
6. ‘Gross income,’ for the purposes of this section, has the same meaning as it has
in 26 U.S.C. § 61 and 26 C.F.R. § 1.61.”;
and inserting the following:
“6. Other Definitions.—For purposes of this section:
A ‘credit claimed against tax’ is an item that reduces the amount of tax directly.
In contrast, a ‘deduction’ is an item that reduces the amount of taxable income.
‘Gross income’ has the same meaning as it has in 26 U.S.C. § 61 and 26 C.F.R.
§ 1.61.”; and
in Note 7 by inserting “Aggregation of Individual and Corporate Tax Loss.—” at the
beginning.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to a circuit conflict regarding
whether a sentencing court, in calculating tax loss as defined in §2T1.1 (Tax Evasion;
Willful Failure to File Return, Supply Information, or Pay Tax; Fraudulent or False
Returns, Statements, or Other Documents), may consider previously unclaimed cred-
its, deductions, and exemptions that the defendant legitimately could have claimed if
he or she had filed an accurate tax return.
The Tenth and Second Circuits have held that a sentencing court may give the defend-
ant credit for a legitimate but unclaimed deduction. These circuit courts generally rea-
son that, while a district court need not speculate about unclaimed deductions if the
defendant offers weak support, nothing in the guidelines prohibits a sentencing court
from considering evidence of unclaimed deductions where a defendant offers convinc-
ing proof. See United States v. Hoskins, 654 F.3d 1086, 1094 (10th Cir. 2011) (“[W]here
defendant offers convincing proof — where the court’s exercise is neither nebulous nor
complex — nothing in the Guidelines prohibits a sentencing court from considering
evidence of unclaimed deductions in analyzing a defendant’s estimate of the tax loss
suffered by the government.”); United States v. Martinez-Rios, 143 F.3d 662, 671
(2d Cir. 1998) (holding that “the sentencing court need not base its tax loss calculation
on gross unreported income if it can make a ‘more accurate determination’ of the in-
tended loss and that determination of the tax loss involves giving the defendant the
benefit of legitimate but unclaimed deductions”); United States v. Gordon, 291 F.3d
181, 187 (2d Cir. 2002) (applying Martinez-Rios, the court held that the district court
Amendment 774
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 41
erred when it refused to consider potential unclaimed deductions in its sentencing
analysis).
Six other circuit courts — the Fourth, Fifth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, and Eleventh —
have reached the opposite conclusion, directly or indirectly holding that a court may
not consider unclaimed deductions to reduce the tax loss. These circuit courts generally
reason that the “object of the [defendant’s] offense” is established by the amount stated
on the fraudulent return, and that courts should not be required to reconstruct the
defendant’s return based on speculation regarding the many hypothetical ways the
defendant could have completed the return. See United States v. Delfino, 510 F.3d 468,
473 (4th Cir. 2007) (“The law simply does not require the district court to engage in
[speculation as to what deductions would have been allowed], nor does it entitle the
Delfinos to the benefit of deductions they might have claimed now that they stand
convicted of tax evasion.”); United States v. Phelps, 478 F.3d 680, 682 (5th Cir. 2007)
(holding that the defendant could not reduce tax loss by taking a social security tax
deduction that he did not claim on the false return); United States v. Chavin, 316 F.3d
666, 677 (7th Cir. 2002) (“Here, the object of [the defendant]’s offense was the amount
by which he underreported and fraudulently stated his tax liability on his return; ref-
erence to other unrelated mistakes on the return such as unclaimed deductions tells
us nothing about the amount of loss to the government that his scheme intended to
create.”); United States v. Psihos, 683 F.3d 777, 781–82 (7th Cir. 2012) (following
Chavin in disallowing consideration of unclaimed deductions); United States v. Sher-
man, 372 F.App’x 668, 676–77 (8th Cir. 2010); United States v. Blevins, 542 F.3d 1200,
1203 (8th Cir. 2008) (declining to decide “whether an unclaimed tax benefit may ever
offset tax loss,” but finding the district court properly declined to reduce tax loss based
on taxpayers’ unclaimed deductions); United States v. Yip, 592 F.3d 1035, 1041
(9th Cir. 2010) (“We hold that § 2T1.1 does not entitle a defendant to reduce the tax
loss charged to him by the amount of potentially legitimate, but unclaimed, deductions
even if those deductions are related to the offense.”); United States v. Clarke, 562 F.3d
1158, 1165 (11th Cir. 2009) (holding that the defendant was not entitled to a tax loss
calculation based on a filing status other than the one he actually used; “[t]he district
court did not err in computing the tax loss based on the fraudulent return Clarke ac-
tually filed, and not on the tax return Clarke could have filed but did not.”).
The amendment resolves the conflict by amending the Commentary to §2T1.1 to es-
tablish a new application note regarding the consideration of unclaimed credits, de-
ductions, or exemptions in calculating a defendant’s tax loss. This amendment reflects
the Commission’s view that consideration of legitimate unclaimed credits, deductions,
or exemptions, subject to certain limitations and exclusions, is most consistent with
existing provisions regarding the calculation of tax loss in §2T1.1. See, e.g., USSG
§2T1.1, comment. (n.1) (“the guidelines contemplate that the court will simply make a
reasonable estimate based on the available facts”); USSG §2T1.1, comment. (backg’d.)
(“a greater tax loss is obviously more harmful to the treasury and more serious than a
smaller one with otherwise similar characteristics”); USSG §2T1.1, comment. (n.1) (al-
lowing a sentencing court to go beyond the presumptions set forth in the guideline if
“the government or defense provides sufficient information for a more accurate assess-
ment of the tax loss,” and providing “the court should use any method of determining
the tax loss that appears appropriate to reasonably calculate the loss that would have
resulted had the offense been successfully completed”).
The new application note first provides that courts should always account for the
standard deduction and personal and dependent exemptions to which the defendant
was entitled. The Commission received public comment and testimony that such de-
ductions and exemptions are commonly considered and accepted by the government
Amendment 774
42 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
during the course of its investigation and during the course of plea negotiations. Con-
sistent with this standard practice, the Commission determined that accounting for
these generally undisputed and readily verifiable deductions and exemptions where
they are not previously claimed (most commonly where the offense involves a failure
to file a tax return) is appropriate.
The new application note further provides that courts should also account for any other
previously unclaimed credit, deduction, or exemption that is needed to ensure a rea-
sonable estimate of the tax loss, but only to the extent certain conditions are met. First,
the credit, deduction, or exemption must be one that was related to the tax offense and
could have been claimed at the time the tax offense was committed. This condition
reflects the Commission’s determination that a defendant should not be permitted to
invoke unforeseen or after-the-fact changes or characterizations — such as offsetting
losses that occur before or after the relevant tax year or substituting a more advanta-
geous depreciation method or filing status — to lower the tax loss. To permit a defend-
ant to optimize his return in this manner would unjustly reward defendants, and could
require unjustifiable speculation and complexity at the sentencing hearing.
Second, the otherwise unclaimed credit, deduction, or exemption must be reasonably
and practicably ascertainable. Consistent with the instruction in Application Note 1,
this condition reaffirms the Commission’s position that sentencing courts need only
make a reasonable estimate of tax loss. In this regard, the Commission recognized that
consideration of some unclaimed credits, deductions, or exemptions could require sen-
tencing courts to make unnecessarily complex tax determinations, and therefore con-
cluded that limiting consideration of unclaimed credits, deductions, or exemptions to
those that are reasonably and practicably ascertainable is appropriate.
Third, the defendant must present information to support the credit, deduction, or ex-
emption sufficiently in advance of sentencing to provide an adequate opportunity to
evaluate whether it has sufficient indicia of reliability to support its probable accuracy.
Consistent with the principles set forth in §6A1.3 (Resolution of Disputed Factors)
(Policy Statement), this condition ensures that the parties have an adequate oppor-
tunity to present information relevant to the court’s consideration of any unclaimed
credits, deductions, or exemptions raised at sentencing.
In addition, the new application note provides that certain categories of credits, deduc-
tions, or exemptions shall not be considered by the court in any case. In particular,
“the court shall not account for payments to third parties made in a manner that en-
couraged or facilitated a separate violation of law (e.g., ‘under the table’ payments to
employees or expenses incurred to obstruct justice).” The Commission determined that
payments made in this manner result in additional harm to the tax system and the
legal system as a whole. Therefore, to use them to reduce the tax loss would unjustifi-
ably benefit the defendant and would result in a tax loss figure that understates the
seriousness of the offense and the culpability of the defendant.
Finally, the application note makes clear that the burden is on the defendant to estab-
lish any credit, deduction, or exemption permitted under this new application note by
a preponderance of the evidence, which is also consistent with the commentary in
§6A1.3.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2013.
Amendment 775
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 43
AMENDMENT 775
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §3E1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in
Note 6 by adding at the end of the paragraph that begins “Because the Government”
the following as the last sentence: “The government should not withhold such a motion
based on interests not identified in §3E1.1, such as whether the defendant agrees to
waive his or her right to appeal.”; and
by adding after the paragraph that begins “Because the Government” the following
new paragraph:
“If the government files such a motion, and the court in deciding whether to grant the
motion also determines that the defendant has assisted authorities in the investigation
or prosecution of his own misconduct by timely notifying authorities of his intention to
enter a plea of guilty, thereby permitting the government to avoid preparing for trial
and permitting the government and the court to allocate their resources efficiently, the
court should grant the motion.”.
The Commentary to §3E1.1 captioned “Background” is amended in the paragraph that
begins “Section 401(g)” by striking “the last paragraph” and inserting “the first sen-
tence of the second paragraph”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment addresses two circuit conflicts involving
the guideline for acceptance of responsibility, §3E1.1 (Acceptance of Responsibility). A
defendant who clearly demonstrates acceptance of responsibility for his offense re-
ceives a 2-level reduction under subsection (a) of §3E1.1. The two circuit conflicts both
involve the circumstances under which the defendant is eligible for a third level of
reduction under subsection (b) of §3E1.1. Subsection (b) provides:
(b) If the defendant qualifies for a decrease under subsection (a),
the offense level determined prior to the operation of subsec-
tion (a) is level 16 or greater, and upon motion of the govern-
ment stating that the defendant has assisted authorities in the
investigation or prosecution of his own misconduct by timely
notifying authorities of his intention to enter a plea of guilty,
thereby permitting the government to avoid preparing for trial
and permitting the government and the court to allocate their
resources efficiently, decrease the offense level by 1 additional
level.
The first circuit conflict involves the government’s discretion under subsection (b) and,
in particular, whether the government may withhold a motion based on an interest not
identified in §3E1.1, such as the defendant’s refusal to waive his right to appeal. The
second conflict involves the court’s discretion under subsection (b) and, in particular,
whether the court may decline to apply the third level of reduction when the govern-
ment has moved for it.
These circuit conflicts are unusual in that they involve guideline and commentary pro-
visions that Congress directly amended. See section 401(g) of the Prosecutorial Reme-
dies and Other Tools to end the Exploitation of Children Today Act of 2003, Pub.
L. 108–21 (the “PROTECT Act”); see also USSG App. C, Amendment 649 (effective
April 30, 2003) (implementing amendments to the guidelines made directly by the
PROTECT Act). They also implicate a congressional directive to the Commission not
Amendment 775
44 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
to “alter or repeal” the congressional amendments. See section 401(j)(4) of the PRO-
TECT Act. Accordingly, in considering these conflicts, the Commission has not only
reviewed public comment, sentencing data, case law, and the other types of infor-
mation it ordinarily considers, but has also studied the operation of §3E1.1 before the
PROTECT Act, the congressional action to amend §3E1.1, and the legislative history
of that congressional action.
The Government’s Discretion to Withhold the Motion
The first circuit conflict involves the government’s discretion under subsection (b) and,
in particular, whether the government may withhold a motion based on an interest not
identified in §3E1.1, such as the defendant’s refusal to waive his right to appeal.
Several circuits have held that a defendant’s refusal to sign an appellate waiver is a
legitimate reason for the government to withhold a §3E1.1(b) motion. See, e.g., United
States v. Johnson, 581 F.3d 994, 1002 (9th Cir. 2009) (holding that “allocation and
expenditure of prosecutorial resources for the purposes of defending an appeal is a
rational basis” for such refusal); United States v. Deberry, 576 F.3d 708, 711 (7th Cir.
2009) (holding that requiring the defendant to sign an appeal waiver would avoid “ex-
pense and uncertainty” on appeal); United States v. Newson, 515 F.3d 374, 378
(5th Cir. 2008) (holding that the government’s interests under §3E1.1 encompass not
only the government’s time and effort at prejudgment stage but also at post-judgment
proceedings).
In contrast, the Fourth Circuit has held that a defendant’s refusal to sign an appellate
waiver is not a legitimate reason for the government to withhold a §3E1.1(b) motion.
See United States v. Divens, 650 F.3d 343, 348 (4th Cir. 2011) (stating that “the text
of §3E1.1(b) reveals a concern for the efficient allocation of trial resources, not appel-
late resources” [emphasis in original]); see also United States v. Davis, 714 F.3d 474,
476 (7th Cir. 2013) (Rovner, J., concurring) (“insisting that [the defendant] waive his
right to appeal before he may receive the maximum credit under the Guidelines for
accepting responsibility serves none of the interests identified in section 3E1.1”). The
majority in Davis called for the conflict to be resolved, stating: “Resolution of this con-
flict is the province of the Supreme Court or the Sentencing Commission.” Davis,
714 F.3d at 475 (per curiam). The Second Circuit, stating that the Fourth Circuit’s
reasoning in Divens applies “with equal force” to the defendant’s request for an evi-
dentiary hearing on sentencing issues, held that the government may not withhold a
§3E1.1 motion based upon such a request. See United States v. Lee, 653 F.3d 170, 175
(2d Cir. 2011).
The PROTECT Act added Commentary to §3E1.1 stating that “[b]ecause the Govern-
ment is in the best position to determine whether the defendant has assisted authori-
ties in a manner that avoids preparing for trial, an adjustment under subsection (b)
may only be granted upon a formal motion by the Government at the time of sentenc-
ing.” See §3E1.1, comment. (n.6). The PROTECT Act also amended §3E1.1(b) to pro-
vide that the government motion state, among other things, that the defendant’s noti-
fication of his intention to enter a plea of guilty permitted “the government to avoid
preparing for trial and . . . the government and the court to allocate their resources
efficiently . . . .”
In its study of the PROTECT Act, the Commission could discern no congressional in-
tent to allow decisions under §3E1.1 to be based on interests not identified in §3E1.1.
Furthermore, consistent with Divens and the concurrence in Davis, the Commission
determined that the defendant’s waiver of his or her right to appeal is an example of
Amendment 775
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 45
an interest not identified in §3E1.1. Accordingly, this amendment adds an additional
sentence to the Commentary stating that “[t]he government should not withhold such
a motion based on interests not identified in §3E1.1, such as whether the defendant
agrees to waive his or her right to appeal.”
The Court’s Discretion to Deny the Motion
The second conflict involves the court’s discretion under subsection (b) and, in partic-
ular, whether the court may decline to apply the third level of reduction when the
government has moved for it.
The Seventh Circuit has held that if the government makes the motion (and the other
two requirements of subsection (b) are met, i.e., the defendant qualifies for the 2-level
decrease and the offense level is level 16 or greater), the third level of reduction must
be awarded. See United States v. Mount, 675 F.3d 1052 (7th Cir. 2012).
In contrast, the Fifth Circuit has held that the district court retains discretion to deny
the motion. See United States v. Williamson, 598 F.3d 227, 230 (5th Cir. 2010). In
Williamson, the defendant was convicted after jury trial but successfully appealed. Af-
ter remand, he pled guilty to a lesser offense. The government moved for the third level
of reduction, but the court declined to grant it because “regardless of however much
additional trial preparation the government avoided through Williamson’s guilty plea
following remand, the preparation for the initial trial and the use of the court’s re-
sources for that trial meant that the § 3E1.1(b) benefits to the government and the
court were not obtained.” Id. at 231. The Fifth Circuit affirmed, holding that the deci-
sion whether to grant the third level of reduction “is the district court’s — not the
government’s — even though the court may only do so on the government’s motion.”
Id. at 230.
This amendment amends the Commentary to §3E1.1 by adding the following state-
ment: “If the government files such a motion, and the court in deciding whether to
grant the motion also determines that the defendant has assisted authorities in the
investigation or prosecution of his own misconduct by timely notifying authorities of
his intention to enter a plea of guilty, thereby permitting the government to avoid pre-
paring for trial and permitting the government and the court to allocate their resources
efficiently, the court should grant the motion.”
In its study of the PROTECT Act, the Commission could discern no congressional in-
tent to take away from the court its responsibility under §3E1.1 to make its own de-
termination of whether the conditions were met. In particular, both the language
added to the Commentary by the PROTECT Act and the legislative history of the PRO-
TECT Act speak in terms of allowing the court discretion to “grant” the third level of
reduction. See USSG §3E1.1, comment. (n.6) (stating that the third level of reduction
“may only be granted upon a formal motion by the Government”); H.R. Rep. No.
108–66, at 59 (2003) (Conf. Rep.) (stating that the PROTECT Act amendment would
“only allow courts to grant an additional third point reduction for ‘acceptance of re-
sponsibility’ upon motion of the government.”). In addition, the Commission observes
that one of the considerations in §3E1.1(b) is whether the defendant’s actions permit-
ted the court to allocate its resources efficiently, and the court is in the best position to
make that determination. Accordingly, consistent with congressional intent, this
amendment recognizes that the court continues to have discretion to decide whether
to grant the third level of reduction.
Amendment 776
46 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Finally, and as mentioned above, the Commission in its study of the PROTECT Act
could discern no congressional intent to allow decisions under §3E1.1 to be based on
interests not identified in §3E1.1. For that reason, this amendment indicates that, if
the government has filed the motion and the court also determines that the circum-
stances identified in §3E1.1 are present, the court should grant the motion.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2013.
AMENDMENT 776
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §5G1.3 captioned “Background” is amended by strik-
ing the following: “In a case in which a defendant is subject to an undischarged sen-
tence of imprisonment, the court generally has authority to impose an imprisonment
sentence on the current offense to run concurrently with or consecutively to the prior
undischarged term. 18 U.S.C. § 3584(a). Exercise of that authority,”;
and inserting the following: “Federal courts generally ‘have discretion to select
whether the sentences they impose will run concurrently or consecutively with respect
to other sentences that they impose, or that have been imposed in other proceedings,
including state proceedings.’ See Setser v. United States, 132 S. Ct. 1463, 1468 (2012);
18 U.S.C. § 3584(a). Federal courts also generally have discretion to order that the
sentences they impose will run concurrently with or consecutively to other state sen-
tences that are anticipated but not yet imposed. See Setser, 132 S. Ct. at 1468. Exercise
of that discretion,”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to a recent Supreme Court deci-
sion that federal courts have discretion to order that the sentence run consecutively to
(or concurrently with) an anticipated, but not yet imposed, state sentence. See Setser
v. United States, 132 S. Ct. 1463, 1468 (2012).
The discretion recognized in Setser for anticipated state sentences is similar to the
discretion that federal courts have under 18 U.S.C. § 3584 for previously imposed sen-
tences. Under section 3584, a federal court imposing a sentence generally has discre-
tion to order that the sentence run consecutively to (or, in the alternative, concurrently
with) a term of imprisonment previously imposed but not yet discharged. See 18 U.S.C.
§ 3584(a). Section 5G1.3 (Imposition of a Sentence on a Defendant Subject to an Un-
discharged Term of Imprisonment) provides guidance to the court in determining
whether, and how, to use the discretion under section 3584, i.e., whether the sentence
should run consecutively to (or, in the alternative, concurrently with) the prior undis-
charged term of imprisonment.
The amendment amends the background commentary to §5G1.3 to include a statement
that, in addition to the discretion provided by section 3584, federal courts also gener-
ally have discretion under Setser to order that the sentences they impose will run con-
secutively to or concurrently with other state sentences that are anticipated but not
yet imposed. Determining whether, and how, to use this discretion will depend on the
adequacy of the information available. See Setser, 132 S. Ct. at 1471 n.6 (“Of course, a
district court should exercise the power to impose anticipatory consecutive (or concur-
rent) sentences intelligently. In some situations, a district court may have inadequate
information and may forbear, but in other situations, that will not be the case.”). Add-
ing this statement to the guideline that applies to the court’s discretion under section
Amendment 777
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 47
3584 is intended to provide heightened awareness of the court’s similar discretion un-
der Setser.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2013.
AMENDMENT 777
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §2B1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in
Note 15 (as renumbered by Amendment 772) by striking “1a(5)” both places it appears
and inserting “1a(11)”; by striking “1a(6)” both places it appears and inserting “1a(12)”;
by striking “1a(20)” both places it appears and inserting “1a(28)”; and by striking
“1a(23)” both places it appears and inserting “1a(31)”.
Section 2B2.3(b) is amended by striking paragraph (1) as follows:
“(1) If the trespass occurred (A) at a secure government facility; (B) at a nuclear
energy facility; (C) on a vessel or aircraft of the United States; (D) in a secure
area of an airport or a seaport; (E) at a residence; (F) at Arlington National
Cemetery or a cemetery under the control of the National Cemetery Admin-
istration; or (G) on a computer system used (i) to maintain or operate a critical
infrastructure; or (ii) by or for a government entity in furtherance of the ad-
ministration of justice, national defense, or national security, increase by 2 lev-
els.”;
and inserting the following:
“(1) (Apply the greater) If—
(A) the trespass occurred (i) at a secure government facility; (ii) at a nu-
clear energy facility; (iii) on a vessel or aircraft of the United States;
(iv) in a secure area of an airport or a seaport; (v) at a residence; (vi) at
Arlington National Cemetery or a cemetery under the control of the
National Cemetery Administration; (vii) at any restricted building or
grounds; or (viii) on a computer system used (I) to maintain or operate
a critical infrastructure; or (II) by or for a government entity in fur-
therance of the administration of justice, national defense, or national
security, increase by 2 levels; or
(B) the trespass occurred at the White House or its grounds, or the Vice
President’s official residence or its grounds, increase by 4 levels.”.
The Commentary to §2B2.3 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
inserting after the paragraph that begins “ ‘Protected computer’ means” the following:
“ ‘Restricted building or grounds’ has the meaning given that term in 18 U.S.C.
§ 1752.”; and
in Note 2 by inserting “Application of Subsection (b)(3).—” at the beginning.
The Notes to the Drug Quantity Table in §2D1.1(c) are amended in each of Notes (H)
and (I) by striking “1308.11(d)(30)” and inserting “1308.11(d)(31)”.
Amendment 777
48 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
The Commentary to §2J1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 2(A) by
striking “Chapter Three, Part C” in the heading and inserting “§3C1.1”; and by striking
“Chapter Three, Part C (Obstruction and Related Adjustments)” and inserting “§3C1.1
(Obstructing or Impeding the Administration of Justice)”.
The Commentary to §2J1.3 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 2 by
striking “Chapter Three, Part C (Obstruction and Related Adjustments)” and inserting
“§3C1.1 (Obstructing or Impeding the Administration of Justice)”; and in Note 3 by
striking “Chapter Three, Part C (Obstruction and Related Adjustments)” and inserting
“§3C1.1”.
The Commentary to §2J1.6 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 2 by
striking “Chapter Three, Part C (Obstruction and Related Adjustments)” and inserting
“§3C1.1 (Obstructing or Impeding the Administration of Justice)”.
The Commentary to §2J1.9 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking “Chapter Three, Part C (Obstruction and Related Adjustments)” and inserting
“§3C1.1 (Obstructing or Impeding the Administration of Justice)”; and in Note 2 by
striking “Chapter Three, Part C (Obstruction and Related Adjustments)” and inserting
“§3C1.1”.
The Commentary to §4A1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in each of
Notes 2 and 3 by striking “court martial” and inserting “court-martial”.
Section 4A1.2(g) is amended by striking “court martial” both places it appears and
inserting “court-martial”.
Appendix A (Statutory Index) is amended by inserting after the line referenced to
18 U.S.C. § 38 the following:
“18 U.S.C. § 39A 2A5.2”;
in the line referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 554 by inserting “2M5.1,” after “2B1.5,”;
by inserting after the line referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 1513 the following:
“18 U.S.C. § 1514(c) 2J1.2”;
by inserting after the line referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 1751(e) the following:
“18 U.S.C. § 1752 2A2.4, 2B2.3”; and
by inserting after the line referenced to 19 U.S.C. § 1586(e) the following:
“19 U.S.C. § 1590(d)(1) 2T3.1
19 U.S.C. § 1590(d)(2) 2D1.1”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to recently enacted legislation
and miscellaneous and technical guideline issues.
Amendment 777
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 49
Aiming a Laser Pointer at an Aircraft
First, the amendment responds to Section 311 of the FAA Modernization and Reform
Act of 2012, Pub. L. 112–95 (enacted February 14, 2012), which established a new
criminal offense at 18 U.S.C. § 39A (Aiming a laser pointer at an aircraft). The offense
applies to whoever knowingly aims the beam of a laser pointer at an aircraft in the
special aircraft jurisdiction of the United States or at the flight path of such an aircraft.
The statutory maximum term of imprisonment is five years.
The amendment amends Appendix A (Statutory Index) to reference section 39A of-
fenses to §2A5.2 (Interference with Flight Crew Member or Flight Attendant; Interfer-
ence with Dispatch, Navigation, Operation, or Maintenance of Mass Transportation
Vehicle). Section 2A5.2 is the most analogous guideline because the offense involves
interference with an aircraft in flight.
Restraining the Harassment of a Victim or Witness
Second, the amendment responds to section 3(a) of the Child Protection Act of 2012,
Pub. L. 112–206 (enacted December 7, 2012), which established a new offense at
18 U.S.C. § 1514(c) that makes it a criminal offense to knowingly and intentionally
violate or attempt to violate an order issued under section 1514 (Civil action to restrain
harassment of a victim or witness). The new offense has a statutory maximum term of
imprisonment of five years.
The amendment amends Appendix A (Statutory Index) to reference section 1514(c)
offenses to §2J1.2 (Obstruction of Justice). Section 2J1.2 is the most analogous guide-
line because the offense involves interference with judicial proceedings.
Restricted Buildings and Grounds
Third, the amendment responds to the Federal Restricted Buildings and Grounds Im-
provement Act of 2011, Pub. L. 112–98 (enacted March 8, 2012), which amended the
criminal offense at 18 U.S.C. § 1752 (Restricted building or grounds). As so amended,
the statute defines “restricted buildings or grounds” to mean any restricted area (A) of
the White House or its grounds, or the Vice President’s official residence or its grounds;
(B) of a building or grounds where the President or other person protected by the
United States Secret Service is or will be temporarily visiting; or (C) of a building or
grounds restricted in conjunction with an event designated as a special event of na-
tional significance. The statute makes it a crime to enter or remain; to impede or dis-
rupt the orderly conduct of business or official functions; to obstruct or impede ingress
or egress; or to engage in any physical violence against any person or property. The
Act did not change the statutory maximum term of imprisonment, which is ten years
if the person used or carried a deadly or dangerous weapon or firearm or if the offense
results in significant bodily injury, and one year in any other case.
The amendment amends Appendix A (Statutory Index) to reference section 1752 of-
fenses to §2A2.4 (Obstructing or Impeding Officers) and §2B2.3 (Trespass). These
guidelines are most analogous because the elements of offenses under section 1752
involve either trespass at certain locations (i.e., locations permanently or temporarily
protected by the Secret Service) or interference with official business at such locations,
or both.
The amendment also amends §2B2.3(b)(1) to ensure that a trespass under section 1752
provides a 4-level enhancement if the trespass occurred at the White House or the Vice
Amendment 777
50 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
President’s official residence, or a 2-level enhancement if the trespass occurred at any
other location permanently or temporarily protected by the Secret Service. Sec-
tion 2B2.3(b)(1) provides a 2-level enhancement if the trespass occurred at locations
that involve a significant federal interest, such as nuclear facilities, airports, and sea-
ports. A trespass at a location protected by the Secret Service is no less serious than a
trespass at other locations that involve a significant federal interest and warrants an
equivalent enhancement of 2 levels. Section 2B2.3(b)(1) also provides a 2-level en-
hancement if the trespass occurred at a residence. A trespass at the residence of the
President or the Vice President is more serious and poses a greater risk of harm than
a trespass at an ordinary residence and warrants an enhancement of 4 levels.
Aviation Smuggling
Fourth, the amendment responds to the Ultralight Aircraft Smuggling Prevention Act
of 2012, Pub. L. 112–93 (enacted February 10, 2012), which amended the criminal of-
fense at 19 U.S.C. § 1590 (Aviation smuggling) to clarify that the term “aircraft” in-
cludes ultralight aircraft and to cover attempts and conspiracies. Section 1590 makes
it unlawful for the pilot of an aircraft to transport merchandise, or for any individual
on board any aircraft to possess merchandise, knowing that the merchandise will be
introduced into the United States contrary to law. It is also unlawful for a person to
transfer merchandise between an aircraft and a vessel on the high seas or in the cus-
toms waters of the United States unlawfully. The Act did not change the statutory
maximum terms of imprisonment, which are 20 years if any of the merchandise in-
volved was a controlled substance, see § 1590(d)(2), and five years otherwise,
see § 1590(d)(1).
The amendment amends Appendix A (Statutory Index) to reference offenses under sec-
tion 1590(d)(1) to §2T3.1 (Evading Import Duties or Restrictions (Smuggling); Receiv-
ing or Trafficking in Smuggled Property). In such cases, §2T3.1 is the most analogous
guideline because the offense involves smuggling. The amendment also amends Ap-
pendix A (Statutory Index) to reference offenses under section 1590(d)(2) to §2D1.1
(Unlawful Manufacturing, Importing, Exporting, or Trafficking (Including Possession
with Intent to Commit These Offenses); Attempt or Conspiracy). In such cases, §2D1.1
is the most analogous guideline because controlled substances are involved in these
offenses.
Interaction Between Offense Guidelines in Chapter Two, Part J, and Certain
Adjustments in Chapter Three, Part C
Fifth, the amendment responds to an application issue that may arise in cases in which
the defendant is sentenced under an offense guideline in Chapter Two, Part J (Offenses
Involving the Administration of Justice) and the defendant may also be subject to an
adjustment under Chapter Three, Part C (Obstruction and Related Adjustments). Spe-
cifically, there are application notes in four Chapter Two, Part J guidelines that, it has
been argued, preclude the court from applying adjustments in Chapter Three, Part C.
See, e.g., United States v. Duong, 665 F.3d 364 (1st Cir. 2012) (observing that, “accord-
ing to the literal terms” of the application notes, an adjustment under Chapter Three,
Part C “ ‘does not apply,’ ” but “reject[ing] that premise”).
The amendment amends the relevant application notes in Chapter Two, Part J
(see §§2J1.2, comment. (n.2(A)); 2J1.3, comment. (n.2); 2J1.6, comment. (n.2); 2J1.9,
comment. (n.1)) to clarify the Commission’s intent that they restrict the court from
applying §3C1.1 (Obstructing or Impeding the Administration of Justice) but do not
restrict the court from applying §§3C1.2, 3C1.3, and 3C1.4. These changes resolve the
Amendment 777
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 51
application issue consistent with Duong and promote clarity and consistency in the
application of these adjustments.
Export Offenses Under 18 U.S.C. § 554
Sixth, the amendment broadens the range of guidelines to which export offenses under
18 U.S.C. § 554 (Smuggling goods from the United States) are referenced. Section 554
makes it unlawful to export or send from the United States (or attempt to do so) any
merchandise, article, or object contrary to any law or regulation of the United States.
It also makes it unlawful to receive, conceal, buy, sell, or in any manner facilitate the
transportation, concealment, or sale of such merchandise, article, or object, prior to
exportation, knowing the same to be intended for exportation contrary to any law or
regulation of the United States. Offenses under section 554 have a statutory maximum
term of imprisonment of ten years, and they are referenced in Appendix A (Statutory
Index) to three guidelines: §§2B1.5 (Theft of, Damage to, or Destruction of, Cultural
Heritage Resources or Paleontological Resources; Unlawful Sale, Purchase, Exchange,
Transportation, or Receipt of Cultural Heritage Resources or Paleontological Re-
sources), 2M5.2 (Exportation of Arms, Munitions, or Military Equipment or Services
Without Required Validated Export License), and 2Q2.1 (Offenses Involving Fish,
Wildlife, and Plants).
The amendment amends Appendix A (Statutory Index) to add §2M5.1 (Evasion of Ex-
port Controls; Financial Transactions with Countries Supporting International Ter-
rorism) to the list of guidelines to which offenses under section 554 are referenced. Not
all offenses under section 554 involve munitions, cultural resources, or wildlife, so a
reference to an additional guideline is warranted. For example, a section 554 offense
may be based on the export of ordinary commercial goods in violation of economic sanc-
tions or on the export of “dual-use” goods (i.e., goods that have both commercial and
military applications). For such cases, the additional reference to §2M5.1 promotes
clarity and consistency in guideline application, and the penalty structure of §2M5.1
provides appropriate distinctions between offenses that violate national security con-
trols and offenses that do not.
Technical and Stylistic Changes
Finally, the amendment makes certain technical and stylistic changes to the Guide-
lines Manual. First, it amends the Commentary to §2B1.1 (Theft, Property Destruc-
tion, and Fraud) to provide updated references to the definitions contained in 7 U.S.C.
§ 1a, which were renumbered by Public Law 111–203 (enacted July 21, 2010). Second,
it amends the Notes to the Drug Quantity Table in §2D1.1 (Unlawful Manufacturing,
Importing, Exporting, or Trafficking (Including Possession with Intent to Commit
These Offenses); Attempt or Conspiracy) to provide updated references to the defini-
tion of tetrahydrocannabinols contained in 21 C.F.R. § 1308.11(d), which were renum-
bered by 75 Fed. Reg. 79296 (December 20, 2010). Third, it makes several stylistic
revisions in the Guidelines Manual to change “court martial” to “court-martial.” The
changes are not substantive.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2013.
Amendment 778
52 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
AMENDMENT 778
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §1B1.8 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in
Note 3 by striking “(Inadmissibility of Pleas” and inserting “Pleas”.
The Commentary to §2M3.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking “12958” and inserting “13526”.
The Commentary to §8B2.1 captioned “Background” is amended by striking
“805(a)(2)(5)” and inserting “805(a)(5)”.
The Commentary to §8D1.2 captioned “Application Note” is amended in Note 1 by
striking “3561(b)” and inserting “3561(c)”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment makes certain technical changes to Com-
mentary in the Guidelines Manual. The changes amend—
(1) Application Note 3 to §1B1.8 (Use of Certain Information) to reflect a change
to the heading of Rule 410 of the Federal Rules of Evidence;
(2) Application Note 1 to §2M3.1 (Gathering or Transmitting National Defense
Information to Aid a Foreign Government) to ensure that the Executive Order
to which it refers is the most recent Executive Order; and
(3) the Background Commentary to §8B2.1 (Effective Compliance and Ethics Pro-
gram) and Application Note 1 to §8D1.2 (Term of Probation ― Organizations)
to correct typographical errors in citations to certain statutes.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2013.
AMENDMENT 779
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §1B1.11 captioned “Background” is amended in the
first paragraph by striking the following:
“Although aware of possible ex post facto clause challenges to application of the guide-
lines in effect at the time of sentencing, Congress did not believe that the ex post facto
clause would apply to amended sentencing guidelines. S. Rep. No. 225, 98th Cong.,
1st Sess. 77–78 (1983). While the Commission concurs in the policy expressed by Con-
gress, courts to date have generally held that the ex post facto clause does apply to
sentencing guideline amendments that subject the defendant to increased punish-
ment.”;
and inserting the following:
“However, the Supreme Court has held that the ex post facto clause applies to sentenc-
ing guideline amendments that subject the defendant to increased punishment.
See Peugh v. United States, 133 S. Ct. 2072, 2078 (2013) (holding that ‘there is an
ex post facto violation when a defendant is sentenced under Guidelines promulgated
after he committed his criminal acts and the new version provides a higher applicable
Guidelines sentencing range than the version in place at the time of the offense’).”; and
Amendment 780
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 53
in the paragraph that begins “Subsection (b)(3)” by striking “, cert. denied, 493 U.S.
1062 (1990)”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: The Commission’s policy statement at §1B1.11 (Use of
Guidelines in Effect on Date of Sentencing) provides that the court should apply the
Guidelines Manual in effect on the date the defendant is sentenced unless the court
determines that doing so would violate the ex post facto clause, in which case the court
shall apply the Guidelines Manual in effect on the date the offense of conviction was
committed. See §1B1.11(a), (b)(1).
This amendment updates the Background Commentary to 1B1.11 to reflect the Su-
preme Court’s decision in Peugh v. United States, 133 S. Ct. 2072 (2013), which held
that “there is an ex post facto violation when a defendant is sentenced under Guide-
lines promulgated after he committed his criminal acts and the new version provides
a higher applicable Guidelines sentencing range than the version in place at the time
of the offense.” Id. at 2078. The amendment inserts new language to refer to the Su-
preme Court’s decision in Peugh and deletes obsolete language.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2013.
AMENDMENT 780
AMENDMENT: Section 1B1.10 is amended in each of subsections (a)(1), (a)(2)(A),
(a)(2)(B), and (b)(1) by striking “subsection (c)” each place such term appears and in-
serting “subsection (d)”; by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d); and by in-
serting after subsection (b) the following new subsection (c):
“(c) Cases Involving Mandatory Minimum Sentences and Substantial Assis-
tance.—If the case involves a statutorily required minimum sentence and the
court had the authority to impose a sentence below the statutorily required
minimum sentence pursuant to a government motion to reflect the defendant’s
substantial assistance to authorities, then for purposes of this policy statement
the amended guideline range shall be determined without regard to the oper-
ation of §5G1.1 (Sentencing on a Single Count of Conviction) and §5G1.2 (Sen-
tencing on Multiple Counts of Conviction).”.
The Commentary to §1B1.10 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Notes 1(A),
2, and 4 by striking “subsection (c)” each place such term appears and inserting “sub-
section (d)”; by redesignating Notes 4 through 6 as Notes 5 through 7, respectively; and
by inserting after Note 3 the following new Note 4:
“4. Application of Subsection (c).—As stated in subsection (c), if the case involves
a statutorily required minimum sentence and the court had the authority to
impose a sentence below the statutorily required minimum sentence pursuant
to a government motion to reflect the defendant’s substantial assistance to au-
thorities, then for purposes of this policy statement the amended guideline
range shall be determined without regard to the operation of §5G1.1 (Sentenc-
ing on a Single Count of Conviction) and §5G1.2 (Sentencing on Multiple
Counts of Conviction). For example:
(A) Defendant A is subject to a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment
of 120 months. The original guideline range at the time of sentencing
Amendment 780
54 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
was 135 to 168 months, which is entirely above the mandatory mini-
mum, and the court imposed a sentence of 101 months pursuant to a
government motion to reflect the defendant’s substantial assistance to
authorities. The court determines that the amended guideline range as
calculated on the Sentencing Table is 108 to 135 months. Ordinarily,
§5G1.1 would operate to restrict the amended guideline range to 120
to 135 months, to reflect the mandatory minimum term of imprison-
ment. For purposes of this policy statement, however, the amended
guideline range remains 108 to 135 months.
To the extent the court considers it appropriate to provide a reduction
comparably less than the amended guideline range pursuant to sub-
section (b)(2)(B), Defendant A’s original sentence of 101 months
amounted to a reduction of approximately 25 percent below the mini-
mum of the original guideline range of 135 months. Therefore, an
amended sentence of 81 months (representing a reduction of approxi-
mately 25 percent below the minimum of the amended guideline range
of 108 months) would amount to a comparable reduction and may be
appropriate.
(B) Defendant B is subject to a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment
of 120 months. The original guideline range at the time of sentencing
(as calculated on the Sentencing Table) was 108 to 135 months, which
was restricted by operation of §5G1.1 to a range of 120 to 135 months.
See §5G1.1(c)(2). The court imposed a sentence of 90 months pursuant
to a government motion to reflect the defendant’s substantial assis-
tance to authorities. The court determines that the amended guideline
range as calculated on the Sentencing Table is 87 to 108 months. Ordi-
narily, §5G1.1 would operate to restrict the amended guideline range
to precisely 120 months, to reflect the mandatory minimum term of
imprisonment. See §5G1.1(b). For purposes of this policy statement,
however, the amended guideline range is considered to be 87 to
108 months (i.e., unrestricted by operation of §5G1.1 and the statutory
minimum of 120 months).
To the extent the court considers it appropriate to provide a reduction
comparably less than the amended guideline range pursuant to sub-
section (b)(2)(B), Defendant B’s original sentence of 90 months
amounted to a reduction of approximately 25 percent below the original
guideline range of 120 months. Therefore, an amended sentence of
65 months (representing a reduction of approximately 25 percent be-
low the minimum of the amended guideline range of 87 months) would
amount to a comparable reduction and may be appropriate.”.
The Commentary to §1B1.10 captioned “Background” is amended by striking “subsec-
tion (c)” both places such term appears and inserting “subsection (d)”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment clarifies an application issue that has
arisen with respect to §1B1.10 (Reduction in Term of Imprisonment as a Result of
Amended Guideline Range) (Policy Statement). Circuits have conflicting interpreta-
tions of when, if at all, §1B1.10 provides that a statutory minimum continues to limit
the amount by which a defendant’s sentence may be reduced under 18 U.S.C.
§ 3582(c)(2) when the defendant’s original sentence was below the statutory minimum
due to substantial assistance.
Amendment 780
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 55
This issue arises in two situations. First, there are cases in which the defendant’s orig-
inal guideline range was above the mandatory minimum but the defendant received a
sentence below the mandatory minimum pursuant to a government motion for sub-
stantial assistance. For example, consider a case in which the mandatory minimum
was 240 months, the original guideline range was 262 to 327 months, and the defend-
ant’s original sentence was 160 months, representing a 39 percent reduction for sub-
stantial assistance below the bottom of the guideline range. In a sentence reduction
proceeding pursuant to Amendment 750, the amended guideline range as determined
on the Sentencing Table is 168 to 210 months, but after application of the “trumping”
mechanism in §5G1.1 (Sentencing on a Single Count of Conviction), the mandatory
minimum sentence of 240 months is the guideline sentence. See §5G1.1(b). Section
1B1.10(b)(2)(B) provides that such a defendant may receive a comparable 39 percent
reduction from the bottom of the amended guideline range, but circuits are split over
what to use as the bottom of the range.
The Eighth Circuit has taken the view that the bottom of the amended guideline range
in such a case would be 240 months, i.e., the guideline sentence that results after ap-
plication of the “trumping” mechanism in §5G1.1. See United States v. Golden,
709 F.3d 1229, 1231–33 (8th Cir. 2013). In contrast, the Seventh Circuit has taken the
view that the bottom of the amended guideline range in such a case would be
168 months, i.e., the bottom of the amended range as determined by the Sentencing
Table, without application of the “trumping” mechanism in §5G1.1. See United States
v. Wren, 706 F.3d 861, 863 (7th Cir. 2013). Each circuit found support for its view in
an Eleventh Circuit decision, United States v. Liberse, 688 F.3d 1198 (11th Cir. 2012),
which also discussed this issue.
Second, there are cases in which the defendant’s original guideline range as deter-
mined by the Sentencing Table was, at least in part, below the mandatory minimum,
and the defendant received a sentence below the mandatory minimum pursuant to a
government motion for substantial assistance. In these cases, the “trumping” mecha-
nism in §5G1.1 operated at the original sentence to restrict the guideline range to be
no less than the mandatory minimum. For example, consider a case in which the orig-
inal Sentencing Table guideline range was 140 to 175 months but the mandatory min-
imum was 240 months, resulting (after operation of §5G1.1) in a guideline sentence of
240 months. The defendant’s original sentence was 96 months, representing a 60 per-
cent reduction for substantial assistance below the statutory and guideline minimum.
In a sentence reduction proceeding, the amended Sentencing Table guideline range is
110 to 137 months, resulting (after operation of §5G1.1) in a guideline sentence of
240 months. Section 1B1.10(b)(2)(B) provides that such a defendant may receive a re-
duction from the bottom of the amended guideline range, but circuits are split over
what to use as the bottom of the range.
The Eleventh Circuit, the Sixth Circuit, and the Second Circuit have taken the view
that the bottom of the amended range in such a case would remain 240 months, i.e., the
guideline sentence that results after application of the “trumping” mechanism in
§5G1.1. See United States v. Glover, 686 F.3d 1203, 1208 (11th Cir. 2012); United
States v. Joiner, 727 F.3d 601 (6th Cir. 2013); United States v. Johnson, 732 F.3d 109
(2d Cir. 2013). Under these decisions, the defendant in the example would have an
original range of 240 months and an amended range of 240 months, and would not be
eligible for any reduction because the range has not been lowered. In contrast, the
Third Circuit and the District of Columbia Circuit have taken the view that the bottom
Amendment 781
56 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
of the amended range in such a case would be 110 months, i.e., the bottom of the Sen-
tencing Table guideline range. See United States v. Savani, 733 F.3d 56, 66–7 (3d Cir.
2013); In re Sealed Case, 722 F.3d 361, 369–70 (D.C. Cir. 2013).
The amendment generally adopts the approach of the Third Circuit in Savani and the
District of Columbia Circuit in In re Sealed Case. It amends §1B1.10 to specify that, if
the case involves a statutorily required minimum sentence and the court had the au-
thority to impose a sentence below the statutorily required minimum sentence pursu-
ant to a government motion to reflect the defendant’s substantial assistance to author-
ities, then for purposes of §1B1.10 the amended guideline range shall be determined
without regard to the operation of §5G1.1 and §5G1.2. The amendment also adds a
new application note with examples.
This clarification ensures that defendants who provide substantial assistance to the
government in the investigation and prosecution of others have the opportunity to re-
ceive the full benefit of a reduction that accounts for that assistance. See USSG App. C.
Amend 759 (Reason for Amendment). As the Commission noted in the reason for that
amendment: “The guidelines and the relevant statutes have long recognized that de-
fendants who provide substantial assistance are differently situated than other de-
fendants and should be considered for a sentence below a guideline or statutory mini-
mum even when defendants who are otherwise similar (but did not provide substantial
assistance) are subject to a guideline or statutory minimum. Applying this principle
when the guideline range has been reduced and made available for retroactive appli-
cation under section 3582(c)(2) appropriately maintains this distinction and furthers
the purposes of sentencing.” Id.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2014.
AMENDMENT 781
AMENDMENT: Section 2A2.2(b) is amended by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (6)
as paragraphs (5) through (7), respectively; and by inserting after paragraph (3) the
following new paragraph (4):
“(4) If the offense involved strangling, suffocating, or attempting to strangle or suf-
focate a spouse, intimate partner, or dating partner, increase by 3 levels.
However, the cumulative adjustments from application of subdivisions (2), (3),
and (4) shall not exceed 12 levels.”.
The Commentary to §2A2.2 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by inserting
after “113(a)(2), (3), (6),” the following: “(8),”.
The Commentary to §2A2.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking “or (C)” and inserting “(C) strangling, suffocating, or attempting to strangle or
suffocate; or (D)”; and by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
“ ‘Strangling’ and ‘suffocating’ have the meaning given those terms in 18 U.S.C. § 113.
‘Spouse,’ ‘intimate partner,’ and ‘dating partner’ have the meaning given those terms
in 18 U.S.C. § 2266.”;
Amendment 781
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 57
and in Note 4 by striking “(b)(6)” and inserting “(b)(7)”.
The Commentary to §2A2.2 captioned “Background” is amended in the first paragraph
by striking “minor assaults” and inserting “other assaults”; by striking the comma af-
ter “serious bodily injury” and inserting a semicolon; and by striking the comma after
“cause bodily injury” and inserting “; strangling, suffocating, or attempting to strangle
or suffocate;”;
and in the paragraph that begins “Subsection” by striking “(b)(6)” both places it ap-
pears and inserting “(b)(7)”.
Section 2A2.3 is amended in the heading by striking “Minor Assault” and inserting
“Assault”.
Section 2A2.3(b)(1) is amended by inserting after “substantial bodily injury to” the fol-
lowing: “a spouse, intimate partner, or dating partner, or”.
The Commentary to §2A2.3 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by inserting
after “112,” the following: “113(a)(4), (5), (7),”.
The Commentary to §2A2.3 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking “ ‘Minor assault’ means a misdemeanor assault, or a felonious assault not cov-
ered by §2A2.2 (Aggravated Assault).” and inserting the following new paragraph:
“ ‘Spouse,’ ‘intimate partner,’ and ‘dating partner’ have the meaning given those terms
in 18 U.S.C. § 2266.”.
The Commentary to §2A2.3 captioned “Background” is amended by striking “Minor
assault and battery are covered by this section.” and inserting the following: “This sec-
tion applies to misdemeanor assault and battery and to any felonious assault not cov-
ered by §2A2.2 (Aggravated Assault).”.
Section 2A6.2(b)(1) is amended by striking “(C)” and inserting “(C) strangling, suffo-
cating, or attempting to strangle or suffocate; (D)”; by striking “(D) a pattern” and in-
serting “(E) a pattern”; and by striking “these aggravating factors” and inserting “sub-
divisions (A), (B), (C), (D), or (E)”.
The Commentary to §2A6.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking the paragraph referenced to “Stalking” as follows:
“ ‘Stalking’ means (A) traveling with the intent to kill, injure, harass, or intimidate
another person and, in the course of, or as a result of, such travel, placing the person
in reasonable fear of death or serious bodily injury to that person or an immediate
family member of that person; or (B) using the mail or any facility of interstate or
foreign commerce to engage in a course of conduct that places that person in reasonable
fear of the death of, or serious bodily injury to, that person or an immediate family
member of that person. See 18 U.S.C. § 2261A. ‘Immediate family member’ (A) has the
meaning given that term in 18 U.S.C. § 115(c)(2); and (B) includes a spouse or intimate
partner. ‘Course of conduct’ and ‘spouse or intimate partner’ have the meaning given
those terms in 18 U.S.C. § 2266(2) and (7), respectively.”,
and inserting the following new paragraph:
“ ‘Stalking’ means conduct described in 18 U.S.C. § 2261A.”;
Amendment 781
58 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
and by adding at the end of Note 1 the following new paragraph:
“ ‘Strangling’ and ‘suffocating’ have the meaning given those terms in 18 U.S.C. § 113.”;
and in Notes 3 and 4 by striking “(b)(1)(D)” each place such term appears and inserting
“(b)(1)(E)”.
The Commentary to §2B1.5 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by striking
“1152–1153,”.
The Commentary to §2B2.1 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by striking
“1153,”.
The Commentary to §2H3.1 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by striking
“1375a(d)(3)(C), (d)(5)(B);” and inserting “1375a(d)(5)(B)(i), (ii);”.
The Commentary to §2K1.4 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by striking
“1153,”.
The Commentary to §5D1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 3 by
adding at the end the following:
“(D) Domestic Violence.—If the defendant is convicted for the first time of a domes-
tic violence crime as defined in 18 U.S.C. § 3561(b), a term of supervised re-
lease is required by statute. See 18 U.S.C. § 3583(a). Such a defendant is also
required by statute to attend an approved rehabilitation program, if available
within a 50-mile radius of the legal residence of the defendant. See 18 U.S.C.
§ 3583(d); §5D1.3(a)(3). In any other case involving domestic violence or stalk-
ing in which the defendant is sentenced to imprisonment, it is highly recom-
mended that a term of supervised release also be imposed.”.
Appendix A (Statutory Index) is amended by striking the line referenced to 8 U.S.C.
§ 1375a(d)(3)(C), (d)(5)(B) and inserting the following new line references:
“8 U.S.C. § 1375a(d)(5)(B)(i) 2H3.1
8 U.S.C. § 1375a(d)(5)(B)(ii) 2H3.1
8 U.S.C. § 1375a(d)(5)(B)(iii) 2B1.1”;
in the line referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 113(a)(1) by adding “, 2A3.1” at the end;
in the line referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 113(a)(2) by adding “, 2A3.2, 2A3.3, 2A3.4” at the
end;
after the line referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 113(a)(3) by inserting the following new line
reference:
“18 U.S.C. § 113(a)(4) 2A2.3”;
after the line referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 113(a)(7) by inserting the following new line
reference:
“18 U.S.C. § 113(a)(8) 2A2.2”;
Amendment 781
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 59
by striking the lines referenced to 18 U.S.C. §§ 1152 and 1153;
by inserting after the line referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 1593A the following new line ref-
erence:
“18 U.S.C. § 1597 2X5.2”; and
by striking the lines referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 2423(a) and (b) and inserting the follow-
ing new line reference:
“18 U.S.C. § 2423(a)–(d) 2G1.3”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to recent statutory changes made
by the Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2013 (the “Act”), Pub. L.
No. 113–4 (March 7, 2013), which provided new and expanded criminal offenses and
increased penalties for certain crimes pertaining to assault, sexual abuse, stalking,
domestic violence, and human trafficking.
The Act established new assault offenses and enhanced existing assault offenses at
18 U.S.C. § 113 (Assaults within maritime and territorial jurisdiction). In general, sec-
tion 113 sets forth a range of penalties for assaults within the special maritime and
territorial jurisdiction of the United States. The legislative history of the Act indicates
that Congress intended many of these changes to allow federal prosecutors to address
domestic violence against Native American women more effectively. Such violence of-
ten occurs in a series of incidents of escalating seriousness.
First, the amendment responds to changes in sections 113(a)(1) and (a)(2). Sec-
tion 113(a)(1) prohibits assault with intent to commit murder, and the Act amended it
to also prohibit assault with intent to commit a violation of 18 U.S.C. §§ 2241 (Aggra-
vated sexual abuse) or 2242 (Sexual abuse), with a statutory maximum term of impris-
onment of 20 years. Section 113(a)(2) prohibits assault with intent to commit any fel-
ony except murder, and prior to the Act had also excluded assault with intent to com-
mit a violation of Chapter 109A, including sections 2241, 2242, 2243 (Sexual abuse of
a minor or ward) and 2244 (Abusive sexual contact), with a statutory maximum term
of imprisonment of 10 years. The Act amended section 113(a)(2) to prohibit assault
with intent to commit any felony except murder or a violation of section 2241 or 2242.
The effect of the statutory change is that an assault with intent to commit a violation
of section 2243 or 2244 may now be prosecuted under section 113(a)(2). Offenses under
section 2241 and 2242 are referenced to §2A3.1 (Criminal Sexual Abuse; Attempt to
Commit Criminal Sexual Abuse), and offenses under section 2243 and 2244 are refer-
enced to §§2A3.2 (Criminal Sexual Abuse of a Minor Under the Age of Sixteen Years
(Statutory Rape) or Attempt to Commit Such Acts); 2A3.3 (Criminal Sexual Abuse of
a Ward or Attempt to Commit Such Acts); and 2A3.4 (Abusive Sexual Contact or At-
tempt to Commit Abusive Sexual Contact).
The amendment amends Appendix A (Statutory Index) to reference the expanded of-
fense conduct prohibited by 18 U.S.C. § 113(a)(1) to §2A3.1 and to reference the ex-
panded offense conduct prohibited by 18 U.S.C. § 113(a)(2) to §§2A3.2, 2A3.3, and
2A3.4. The Commission concluded that an assault offense committed with the intent
to commit a sexual abuse offense is analogous to, and in some cases more serious than,
an attempted sexual abuse offense under Chapter 109A, and the criminal sexual abuse
guidelines which apply to attempted sexual abuse offenses were therefore appropriate
for this conduct.
Amendment 781
60 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Second, the Act increased the statutory maximum penalty for violations of 18 U.S.C.
§ 113(a)(4) from six months to one year of imprisonment. Section 113(a)(4) prohibits
an assault by striking, beating, or wounding. Because the crime had been categorized
as a Class B misdemeanor, Appendix A did not previously include a reference for sec-
tion 113(a)(4). The amendment adds such a reference to §2A2.3 (Assault). The Com-
mission determined that §2A2.3 will provide appropriate punishment that is con-
sistent with the statutory maximum term of imprisonment, while sufficiently address-
ing the possible levels of bodily harm that may result to victims in individual cases of
assault by striking, beating, or wounding.
Third, the Act expanded 18 U.S.C. § 113(a)(7), which prohibits assaults resulting in
substantial bodily injury to an individual who has not attained the age of sixteen years,
to also apply to assaults resulting in substantial bodily injury to a spouse, intimate
partner, or dating partner, and provides a statutory maximum term of imprisonment
of five years. Offenses under section 113(a)(7) are referenced in Appendix A to §2A2.3
(Assault). The amendment broadened the scope of §2A2.3(b)(1)(B), which provides a
4-level enhancement if the offense resulted in substantial bodily injury to an individual
under the age of sixteen years, to also provide a 4-level enhancement if the offense
resulted in substantial bodily injury to a spouse, intimate partner, or dating partner.
The Commission determined that because the expanded assaultive conduct of a victim
of domestic violence has the same statutory maximum term of imprisonment, the same
enhancement was warranted as for assaults of individuals under the age of sixteen
resulting in substantial bodily injury.
Fourth, the Act created a new section 113(a)(8) in title 18, which prohibits the assault
of a spouse, intimate partner, or dating partner by strangulation, suffocation, or at-
tempting to strangle or suffocate, with a statutory maximum term of imprisonment of
ten years. After reviewing legislative history, public comment, testimony at a public
hearing on February 13, 2014, and data, the Commission determined that strangula-
tion and suffocation of a spouse, intimate partner, or dating partner represents a sig-
nificant harm not addressed by existing guidelines and specific offense characteristics.
Comment and testimony that the Commission received indicated that strangulation
and suffocation in the domestic violence context is serious conduct that warrants en-
hanced punishment regardless of whether it results in a provable injury that would
lead to a bodily injury enhancement; this conduct harms victims physically and psy-
chologically and can be a predictor of future serious or lethal violence. Testimony and
data also indicated that cases of strangulation and suffocation often involve other bod-
ily injury to a victim separate from the strangulation and suffocation. Congress specif-
ically addressed strangulation and suffocation in the domestic violence context, and
testimony and data indicated that almost all cases involving this conduct occur in that
context and that strangulation and suffocation is most harmful in such cases.
Accordingly, the amendment amends Appendix A to reference section 113(a)(8) to
§2A2.2 (Aggravated Assault) and amends the Commentary to §2A2.2 to provide that
the term “aggravated assault” includes an assault involving strangulation, suffocation,
or an attempt to strangle or suffocate. The amendment amends §2A2.2 to provide a
3-level enhancement at §2A2.2(b)(4) for strangling, suffocating, or attempting to stran-
gle or suffocate a spouse, intimate partner, or dating partner. The amendment also
provides that the cumulative impact of the enhancement for use of a weapon at
§2A2.2(b)(2), bodily injury at §2A2.2(b)(3), and strangulation or suffocation at
§2A2.2(b)(4) is capped at 12 levels. The Commission determined that the cap would
assure that these three specific offense characteristics, which data suggests co-occur
Amendment 781
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 61
frequently, will enhance the ultimate sentence without leading to an excessively severe
result.
Although the amendment refers section 113(a)(8) offenses to §2A2.2, it also amends
§2A6.2 (Stalking or Domestic Violence) to address cases involving strangulation, suf-
focation, or attempting to strangle or suffocate, as a conforming change. The amend-
ment adds strangulation and suffocation as a new aggravating factor at §2A6.2(b)(1),
which results in a 2-level enhancement, or in a 4-level enhancement if it applies in
conjunction with another aggravating factor such as bodily injury or the use of a
weapon.
Fifth, the amendment removes the term “minor assault” from the Guidelines Manual.
Misdemeanor assaults and other felonious assaults are referenced to §2A2.3, which
prior to this amendment was titled “Minor Assault.” Informed by public comment, the
Commission determined that use of the term “minor” is inconsistent with the severity
of the underlying crimes and does a disservice to the victims and communities affected.
Therefore, the amendment changes the title of §2A2.3 to “Assault,” and it removes
other references to “minor assault” from the Background and Commentary sections of
§§2A2.2 and 2A2.3. This is a stylistic change that does not affect the application of
§2A2.3.
Sixth, the amendment amended the Commentary to §5D1.1 (Imposition of a Term of
Supervised Release) to provide additional guidance on the imposition of supervised
release for domestic violence and stalking offenders. The amendment describes the
statutory requirements pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3583(a) if a defendant is convicted for
the first time of a domestic violence offense as defined in 18 U.S.C. § 3561(b). Under
section 3583, a term of supervised release is required, and the defendant is also re-
quired to attend an approved rehabilitation program if one is available within a
50-mile radius from the defendant’s residence.
The Commission received public comment and testimony that supervised release
should be recommended in every case of domestic violence and stalking, and the Com-
mission’s sentencing data showed that in more than ninety percent of the cases sen-
tenced under §2A6.2, supervised release was imposed. Based on this comment, testi-
mony, and data, the amendment amends the Commentary to §5D1.1 to provide that in
any other case involving either a domestic violence or a stalking offense, it is “highly
recommended” that a term of supervised release be imposed.
Seventh, the amendment responds to changes made by the Act amending the federal
statutes related to stalking and domestic violence. For the crimes of interstate domes-
tic violence (18 U.S.C. § 2261), stalking (18 U.S.C. § 2261A), and interstate violation
of a protective order (18 U.S.C. § 2262), the Act expanded the scope of each offense to
provide that a defendant’s mere presence in a special maritime or territorial jurisdic-
tion is sufficient for purposes of satisfying the jurisdictional element of the crimes. The
Act also revised the prohibited conduct set forth in section 2261A to now include stalk-
ing with intent to “intimidate” the victim, and it added the use of an “electronic com-
munication service” or “electronic communication system” as prohibited means of com-
mitting the crime.
The amendment updates the definition of “stalking” in §2A6.2 to reflect these changes
by tying the definition to the conduct described in 18 U.S.C. § 2261A. The Commission
determined that such a change would simplify the application of §2A6.2, while also
ensuring that the definition of stalking remains consistent with any future statutory
changes.
Amendment 781
62 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Eighth, the Act amended 8 U.S.C. § 1375a (Regulation of international marriage bro-
kers) by reorganizing existing offenses and increasing the statutory maximum term of
imprisonment for knowing violations of the regulations concerning marriage brokers
from one year to five years. The Act also added a new criminal provision for “knowingly
and with intent to defraud another person outside of the United States in order to
recruit, solicit, entice, or induce that person into entering a dating or matrimonial re-
lationship,” making false or fraudulent representations regarding the background in-
formation required to be provided to an international marriage brokers. The new of-
fense has a statutory maximum term of imprisonment of one year. The amendment
referenced this new offense in Appendix A to §2B1.1 (Larceny, Embezzlement, and
Other Forms of Theft; Offenses Involving Stolen Property; Property Damage or De-
struction; Fraud and Deceit; Forgery; Offenses involving Altered or Counterfeit Instru-
ments Other than Counterfeit Bearer Obligations of the United States). The Commis-
sion concluded that §2B1.1 is the appropriate guideline because the elements of the
new offense include fraud and deceit. The amendment also amended Appendix A by
revising the other criminal subsections, which continue to be referred to §2H3.1 (In-
terception of Communications; Eavesdropping; Disclosure of Certain Private or Pro-
tected Information), to accord with the reorganization of the statute.
Ninth, the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act, passed as part of the
Act, included a provision expanding subsection (c) of 18 U.S.C. § 2423 (Transportation
of minors), which had previously prohibited U.S. citizens or permanent residents who
traveled abroad from engaging in illicit sexual conduct. After the Act, the same prohi-
bition now also applies to those individuals who reside temporarily or permanently in
a foreign country and engage in such conduct. Section 2423 contains four offenses, set
forth in subsections (a) through (d), each of which prohibits sexual conduct with mi-
nors. Prior to the amendment, Appendix A referenced sections 2423(a) and 2423(b) to
§2G1.3 (Commercial Sex Act or Prohibited Sexual Conduct with a Minor; Transporta-
tion of Minors; Travel to Engage in Commercial Sex or Prohibited Sexual Conduct with
a Minor; Sex Trafficking of Children), but provided no reference for sections 2423(c) or
2423(d), which prohibits arranging, inducing, procuring, or facilitating the travel of a
person for illicit sexual conduct, for the purpose of commercial advantage or financial
gain. Both subsections (c) and (d) provide a 30 year statutory maximum term of im-
prisonment.
The amendment adds references in Appendix A for 18 U.S.C. §§ 2423(c) and (d). Based
on the seriousness of the prohibited conduct, the severity of the penalties, and the vul-
nerability of the victims involved, the Commission concluded that 18 U.S.C. §§ 2423(c)
and (d) should also be referenced in Appendix A to §2G1.3.
Tenth, the Act created a new Class A misdemeanor offense at 18 U.S.C. § 1597 prohib-
iting the knowing destruction, concealment, confiscation or possession of an actual or
purported passport or other immigration documents of another individual if done in
the course of violating or with the intent to violate 18 U.S.C. § 1351, relating to fraud
in foreign labor contracting, or 8 U.S.C. § 1324, relating to bringing in or harboring
certain aliens. The new offense also prohibits this conduct if it is done in order to,
without lawful authority, maintain, prevent, or restrict the labor or services of the in-
dividual, and the knowing obstruction, attempt to obstruct, or interference with or pre-
vention of the enforcement of section 1597. Section 1597 has a statutory maximum
term of imprisonment of one year.
The amendment references this misdemeanor offense to §2X5.2 (Class A Misdemean-
ors (Not Covered by Another Specific Offense Guideline)). This reference comports with
Amendment 782
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 63
the Commission’s intent when it promulgated §2X5.2, as stated in Amendment 685
(effective November 1, 2006), that the Commission will reference new Class A misde-
meanor offenses either to §2X5.2 or to another, more specific Chapter Two guideline,
if appropriate. The Commission determined that with a base offense level of 6, §2X5.2
covers the range of sentencing possibilities that are available for defendants convicted
of this offense, regardless of their criminal history. The Commission may consider ref-
erencing section 1597 to another substantive guideline in the future after more infor-
mation becomes available regarding the type of conduct that constitutes the typical
violation and the aggravating or mitigating factors that may apply.
Finally, the amendment removes from Appendix A the guideline references for two
jurisdictional statutes in title 18 related to crimes committed within Indian country.
Section 1152, also known as the General Crimes Act, grants federal jurisdiction for
federal offenses committed by non-Indians within Indian country. Section 1153, also
known as the Major Crimes Act, grants federal jurisdiction over Indians who commit
certain enumerated offenses within Indian country. The Act expanded section 1153 to
include any felony assault under section 113. Because sections 1152 and 1153 are
simply jurisdictional statutes that do not provide substantive offenses, the Commission
determined there is no need for Appendix A to provide a guidelines reference for those
statutes.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2014.
AMENDMENT 782
AMENDMENT: Section 2D1.1(c) is amended by striking paragraph (17); by redesignating
paragraphs (1) through (16) as paragraphs (2) through (17), respectively; and by in-
serting before paragraph (2) (as so redesignated) the following new paragraph (1):
“(1)  90 KG or more of Heroin; Level 38
 450 KG or more of Cocaine;
 25.2 KG or more of Cocaine Base;
 90 KG or more of PCP, or 9 KG or more of PCP (actual);
 45 KG or more of Methamphetamine, or
4.5 KG or more of Methamphetamine (actual), or
4.5 KG or more of ‘Ice’;
 45 KG or more of Amphetamine, or
4.5 KG or more of Amphetamine (actual);
 900 G or more of LSD;
 36 KG or more of Fentanyl;
 9 KG or more of a Fentanyl Analogue;
 90,000 KG or more of Marihuana;
 18,000 KG or more of Hashish;
 1,800 KG or more of Hashish Oil;
 90,000,000 units or more of Ketamine;
 90,000,000 units or more of Schedule I or II Depressants;
 5,625,000 units or more of Flunitrazepam.”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(2) (as so redesignated) is amended to read as follows:
“(2)  At least 30 KG but less than 90 KG of Heroin; Level 36
 At least 150 KG but less than 450 KG of Cocaine;
Amendment 782
64 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
 At least 8.4 KG but less than 25.2 KG of Cocaine Base;
 At least 30 KG but less than 90 KG of PCP, or
at least 3 KG but less than 9 KG of PCP (actual);
 At least 15 KG but less than 45 KG of Methamphetamine, or
at least 1.5 KG but less than 4.5 KG of Methamphetamine (actual), or
at least 1.5 KG but less than 4.5 KG of ‘Ice’;
 At least 15 KG but less than 45 KG of Amphetamine, or
at least 1.5 KG but less than 4.5 KG of Amphetamine (actual);
 At least 300 G but less than 900 G of LSD;
 At least 12 KG but less than 36 KG of Fentanyl;
 At least 3 KG but less than 9 KG of a Fentanyl Analogue;
 At least 30,000 KG but less than 90,000 KG of Marihuana;
 At least 6,000 KG but less than 18,000 KG of Hashish;
 At least 600 KG but less than 1,800 KG of Hashish Oil;
 At least 30,000,000 units but less than 90,000,000 units of Ketamine;
 At least 30,000,000 units but less than 90,000,000 units of
Schedule I or II Depressants;
 At least 1,875,000 units but less than 5,625,000 units of Flunitrazepam.”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(3) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 36” and insert-
ing “Level 34”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(4) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 34” and insert-
ing “Level 32”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(5) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 32” and insert-
ing “Level 30”; and by inserting before the line referenced to Flunitrazepam the follow-
ing:
“  1,000,000 units or more of Schedule III Hydrocodone;”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(6) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 30” and insert-
ing “Level 28”; and in the line referenced to Schedule III Hydrocode by striking
“700,000 or more” and inserting “At least 700,000 but less than 1,000,000”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(7) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 28” and insert-
ing “Level 26”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(8) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 26” and insert-
ing “Level 24”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(9) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 24” and insert-
ing “Level 22”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(10) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 22” and insert-
ing “Level 20”; and by inserting before the line referenced to Flunitrazepam the follow-
ing:
“  60,000 units or more of Schedule III substances (except Ketamine
or Hydrocodone);”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(11) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 20” and insert-
ing “Level 18”; and in the line referenced to Schedule III substances (except Ketamine
Amendment 782
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 65
or Hydrocodone) by striking “40,000 or more” and inserting “At least 40,000 but less
than 60,000”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(12) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 18” and insert-
ing “Level 16”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(13) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 16” and insert-
ing “Level 14”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(14) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 14” and insert-
ing “Level 12”; by striking the line referenced to Heroin and all that follows through
the line referenced to Fentanyl Analogue and inserting the following:
“(14)  Less than 10 G of Heroin; Level 12
 Less than 50 G of Cocaine;
 Less than 2.8 G of Cocaine Base;
 Less than 10 G of PCP, or
less than 1 G of PCP (actual);
 Less than 5 G of Methamphetamine, or
less than 500 MG of Methamphetamine (actual),
or less than 500 MG of ‘Ice’;
 Less than 5 G of Amphetamine, or
less than 500 MG of Amphetamine (actual);
 Less than 100 MG of LSD;
 Less than 4 G of Fentanyl;
 Less than 1 G of a Fentanyl Analogue;”;
by striking the period at the end of the line referenced to Flunitrazepam and inserting
a semicolon; and by adding at the end the following:
“  80,000 units or more of Schedule IV substances (except Flunitrazepam).”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(15) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 12” and insert-
ing “Level 10”; by striking the line referenced to Heroin and all that follows through
the line referenced to Fentanyl Analogue; and in the line referenced to Schedule IV
substances (except Flunitrazepam) by striking “40,000 or more” and inserting “At least
40,000 but less than 80,000”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(16) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 10” and insert-
ing “Level 8”; in the line referenced to Flunitrazepam by striking “At least 62 but less”
and inserting “Less”; by striking the period at the end of the line referenced to Sched-
ule IV substances (except Flunitrazepam) and inserting a semicolon; and by adding at
the end the following:
“  160,000 units or more of Schedule V substances.”.
Section 2D1.1(c)(17) (as so redesignated) is amended to read as follows:
“(17)  Less than 1 KG of Marihuana; Level 6
 Less than 200 G of Hashish;
 Less than 20 G of Hashish Oil;
 Less than 1,000 units of Ketamine;
 Less than 1,000 units of Schedule I or II Depressants;
 Less than 1,000 units of Schedule III Hydrocodone;
Amendment 782
66 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
 Less than 1,000 units of Schedule III substances (except Ketamine or Hy-
drocodone);
 Less than 16,000 units of Schedule IV substances (except Flunitrazepam);
 Less than 160,000 units of Schedule V substances.”.
The annotation to §2D1.1(c) captioned “Notes to Drug Quantity Table” is amended in
Note (E) by striking “100 G” and inserting “100 grams”; in Note (F) by striking “0.5 ml”
and “25 mg” and inserting “0.5 milliliters” and “25 milligrams”, respectively; and in
Note (G) by striking “0.4 mg” and inserting “0.4 milligrams”.
The Commentary to §2D1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 8(A) by
striking “1 gm”, “5 kg”, “100 gm”, and “500 kg” and inserting “1 gram”, “5 kilograms”,
“100 grams”, and “500 kilograms”, respectively, and by striking “28” and inserting “26”;
in Note 8(B) by striking “999 grams” and inserting “2.49 kilograms”;
in Note 8(C)(i) by striking “22” and inserting “20”, by striking “18” and inserting “16”,
and by striking “24” and inserting “22”;
in Note 8(C)(ii) by striking “8” both places such term appears and inserting “6”, by
striking “five kilograms” and inserting “10,000 units”, and by striking “10” and insert-
ing “8”;
in Note 8(C)(iii) by striking “16” and inserting “14”, by striking “14” and inserting “12”,
and by striking “18” and inserting “16”;
in Note 8(C)(iv) by striking “56,000” and inserting “76,000”, by striking “100,000” and
inserting “200,000”, by striking “200,000” and inserting “600,000”, by striking “56” and
inserting “76”, by striking “59.99” and inserting “79.99”, by striking “4.99” and insert-
ing “9.99”, by striking “6.25” and inserting “12.5”, by striking “999 grams” and insert-
ing “2.49 kilograms”, by striking “1.25” and inserting “3.75”, by striking “59.99” and
inserting “79.99”, and by striking “61.99 (56 + 4.99 + .999)” and inserting “88.48 (76 +
9.99 + 2.49)”;
in Note 8(D), under the heading relating to Schedule III Substances (except ketamine
and hydrocodone), by striking “59.99” and inserting “79.99”; under the heading relating
to Schedule III Hydrocodone, by striking “999.99” and inserting “2,999.99”; under the
heading relating to Schedule IV Substances (except flunitrazepam) by striking “4.99”
and inserting “9.99”; and under the heading relating to Schedule V Substances by
striking “999 grams” and inserting “2.49 kilograms”;
and in Note 9 by striking “500 mg” and “50 gms” and inserting “500 milligrams” and
“50 grams”, respectively.
The Commentary to §2D1.1 captioned “Background” is amended in the paragraph that
begins “The base offense levels in §2D1.1” by striking “32 and 26” and inserting “30
and 24”; and by striking the paragraph that begins “The base offense levels at levels
26 and 32” as follows:
“ The base offense levels at levels 26 and 32 establish guideline ranges with a
lower limit as close to the statutory minimum as possible; e.g., level 32 ranges from
121 to 151 months, where the statutory minimum is ten years or 120 months.”,
and inserting the following new paragraph:
Amendment 782
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 67
“ The base offense levels at levels 24 and 30 establish guideline ranges such
that the statutory minimum falls within the range; e.g., level 30 ranges from 97 to
121 months, where the statutory minimum term is ten years or 120 months.”.
The Commentary to §2D1.2 captioned “Application Note” is amended in Note 1 by
striking “16” and inserting “14”; and by striking “17” and inserting “15”.
Section 2D1.11(d) is amended by striking paragraph (14); by redesignating para-
graphs (1) through (13) as paragraphs (2) through (14), respectively; and by inserting
before paragraph (2) (as so redesignated) the following new paragraph (1):
“(1) 9 KG or more of Ephedrine; Level 38
9 KG or more of Phenylpropanolamine;
9 KG or more of Pseudoephedrine.”.
Section 2D1.11(d)(2) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 38” and insert-
ing “Level 36”; and by striking “3 KG or more” each place such term appears and in-
serting “At least 3 KG but less than 9 KG”.
Section 2D1.11(d)(3) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 36” and insert-
ing “Level 34”.
Section 2D1.11(d)(4) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 34” and insert-
ing “Level 32”.
Section 2D1.11(d)(5) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 32” and insert-
ing “Level 30”.
Section 2D1.11(d)(6) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 30” and insert-
ing “Level 28”.
Section 2D1.11(d)(7) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 28” and insert-
ing “Level 26”.
Section 2D1.11(d)(8) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 26” and insert-
ing “Level 24”.
Section 2D1.11(d)(9) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 24” and insert-
ing “Level 22”.
Section 2D1.11(d)(10) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 22” and in-
serting “Level 20”.
Section 2D1.11(d)(11) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 20” and in-
serting “Level 18”.
Section 2D1.11(d)(12) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 18” and in-
serting “Level 16”.
Section 2D1.11(d)(13) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 16” and in-
serting “Level 14”.
Amendment 782
68 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Section 2D1.11(d)(14) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 14” and in-
serting “Level 12”; and by striking “At least 500 MG but less” each place such term
appears and inserting “Less”.
Section 2D1.11(e) is amended by striking paragraph (10); by redesignating paragraphs
(1) through (9) as paragraphs (2) through (10), respectively; and by inserting before
paragraph (2) (as so redesignated) the following new paragraph (1):
“(1) List I Chemicals Level 30
2.7 KG or more of Benzaldehyde;
60 KG or more of Benzyl Cyanide;
600 G or more of Ergonovine;
1.2 KG or more of Ergotamine;
60 KG or more of Ethylamine;
6.6 KG or more of Hydriodic Acid;
3.9 KG or more of Iodine;
960 KG or more of Isosafrole;
600 G or more of Methylamine;
1500 KG or more of N-Methylephedrine;
1500 KG or more of N-Methylpseudoephedrine;
1.9 KG or more of Nitroethane;
30 KG or more of Norpseudoephedrine;
60 KG or more of Phenylacetic Acid;
30 KG or more of Piperidine;
960 KG or more of Piperonal;
4.8 KG or more of Propionic Anhydride;
960 KG or more of Safrole;
1200 KG or more of 3, 4-Methylenedioxyphenyl-2-propanone;
3406.5 L or more of Gamma-butyrolactone;
2.1 KG or more of Red Phosphorus, White Phosphorus, or Hypophosphorous
Acid.”.
Section 2D1.11(e)(2) (as so redesignated) is amended to read as follows:
“(2) List I Chemicals Level 28
At least 890 G but less than 2.7 KG of Benzaldehyde;
At least 20 KG but less than 60 KG of Benzyl Cyanide;
At least 200 G but less than 600 G of Ergonovine;
At least 400 G but less than 1.2 KG of Ergotamine;
At least 20 KG but less than 60 KG of Ethylamine;
At least 2.2 KG but less than 6.6 KG of Hydriodic Acid;
At least 1.3 KG but less than 3.9 KG of Iodine;
At least 320 KG but less than 960 KG of Isosafrole;
At least 200 G but less than 600 G of Methylamine;
At least 500 KG but less than 1500 KG of N-Methylephedrine;
At least 500 KG but less than 1500 KG of N-Methylpseudoephedrine;
At least 625 G but less than 1.9 KG of Nitroethane;
At least 10 KG but less than 30 KG of Norpseudoephedrine;
At least 20 KG but less than 60 KG of Phenylacetic Acid;
At least 10 KG but less than 30 KG of Piperidine;
At least 320 KG but less than 960 KG of Piperonal;
At least 1.6 KG but less than 4.8 KG of Propionic Anhydride;
At least 320 KG but less than 960 KG of Safrole;
Amendment 782
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 69
At least 400 KG but less than 1200 KG of 3, 4-Methylenedioxyphenyl-2-pro-
panone;
At least 1135.5 L but less than 3406.5 L of Gamma-butyrolactone;
At least 714 G but less than 2.1 KG of Red Phosphorus, White Phosphorus, or
Hypophosphorous Acid.
List II Chemicals
33 KG or more of Acetic Anhydride;
3525 KG or more of Acetone;
60 KG or more of Benzyl Chloride;
3225 KG or more of Ethyl Ether;
3600 KG or more of Methyl Ethyl Ketone;
30 KG or more of Potassium Permanganate;
3900 KG or more of Toluene.”.
Section 2D1.11(e)(3) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 28” and insert-
ing “Level 26”; and, under the heading relating to List II Chemicals, by striking the
line referenced to Acetic Anhydride and all that follows through the line referenced to
Toluene and inserting the following:
“ At least 11 KG but less than 33 KG of Acetic Anhydride;
At least 1175 KG but less than 3525 KG of Acetone;
At least 20 KG but less than 60 KG of Benzyl Chloride;
At least 1075 KG but less than 3225 KG of Ethyl Ether;
At least 1200 KG but less than 3600 KG of Methyl Ethyl Ketone;
At least 10 KG but less than 30 KG of Potassium Permanganate;
At least 1300 KG but less than 3900 KG of Toluene.”.
Section 2D1.11(e)(4) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 26” and insert-
ing “Level 24”.
Section 2D1.11(e)(5) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 24” and insert-
ing “Level 22”.
Section 2D1.11(e)(6) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 22” and insert-
ing “Level 20”.
Section 2D1.11(e)(7) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 20” and insert-
ing “Level 18”.
Section 2D1.11(e)(8) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 18” and insert-
ing “Level 16”.
Section 2D1.11(e)(9) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 16” and insert-
ing “Level 14”.
Section 2D1.11(e)(10) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking “Level 14” and in-
serting “Level 12”; and in each line by striking “At least” and all that follows through
“but less” and inserting “Less”.
The Commentary to §2D1.11 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1(A)
by striking “38” both places such term appears and inserting “36”, and by striking “26”
and inserting “24”; and in Note 1(B) by striking “32” and inserting “30”.
Amendment 782
70 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
The Commentary to §3B1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 3(B) by
striking “14” and inserting “12”.
The Commentary following §3D1.5 captioned “Illustrations of the Operation of the
Multiple-Count Rules” is amended in Example 2 by striking “26” and inserting “24”;
and by striking “28” each place such term appears and inserting “26”.
The Commentary to §5G1.3 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 2(D) by
striking “40” and inserting “90”; by striking “15” and inserting “25”; and by striking
“55” and inserting “115”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment revises the guidelines applicable to drug
trafficking offenses by changing how the base offense levels in the Drug Quantity Table
in §2D1.1 (Unlawful Manufacturing, Importing, Exporting or Trafficking (Including
Possession with Intent to Commit These Offenses); Attempt or Conspiracy) incorporate
the statutory mandatory minimum penalties for such offenses.
When Congress passed the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, Pub. L. 99–570, the Commis-
sion responded by generally incorporating the statutory mandatory minimum sen-
tences into the guidelines and extrapolating upward and downward to set guideline
sentencing ranges for all drug quantities. The quantity thresholds in the Drug Quan-
tity Table were set so as to provide base offense levels corresponding to guideline
ranges that were slightly above the statutory mandatory minimum penalties. Accord-
ingly, offenses involving drug quantities that trigger a five-year statutory minimum
were assigned a base offense level (level 26) corresponding to a sentencing guideline
range of 63 to 78 months for a defendant in Criminal History Category I (a guideline
range that exceeds the five-year statutory minimum for such offenses by at least three
months). Similarly, offenses that trigger a ten-year statutory minimum were assigned
a base offense level (level 32) corresponding to a sentencing guideline range of 121 to
151 months for a defendant in Criminal History Category I (a guideline range that
exceeds the ten-year statutory minimum for such offenses by at least one month). The
base offense levels for drug quantities above and below the mandatory minimum
threshold quantities were extrapolated upward and downward to set guideline sen-
tencing ranges for all drug quantities, see §2D1.1, comment. (backg’d.), with a mini-
mum base offense level of 6 and a maximum base offense level of 38 for most drug
types.
This amendment changes how the applicable statutory mandatory minimum penalties
are incorporated into the Drug Quantity Table while maintaining consistency with
such penalties. See 28 U.S.C. § 994(b)(1) (providing that each sentencing range must
be “consistent with all pertinent provisions of title 18, United States Code”);
see also 28 U.S.C. § 994(a) (providing that the Commission shall promulgate guide-
lines and policy statements “consistent with all pertinent provisions of any Federal
statute”).
Specifically, the amendment reduces by two levels the offense levels assigned to the
quantities that trigger the statutory mandatory minimum penalties, resulting in cor-
responding guideline ranges that include the mandatory minimum penalties. Accord-
ingly, offenses involving drug quantities that trigger a five-year statutory minimum
are assigned a base offense level of 24 (51 to 63 months at Criminal History Category I,
which includes the five-year (60 month) statutory minimum for such offenses), and
offenses involving drug quantities that trigger a ten-year statutory minimum are as-
signed a base offense level of 30 (97 to 121 months at Criminal History Category I,
Amendment 782
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 71
which includes the ten-year (120 month) statutory minimum for such offenses). Of-
fense levels for quantities above and below the mandatory minimum threshold quan-
tities similarly are adjusted downward by two levels, except that the minimum base
offense level of 6 and the maximum base offense level of 38 for most drug types is
retained, as are previously existing minimum and maximum base offense levels for
particular drug types.
The amendment also makes parallel changes to the quantity tables in §2D1.11 (Un-
lawfully Distributing, Importing, Exporting or Possessing a Listed Chemical; Attempt
or Conspiracy), which apply to offenses involving chemical precursors of controlled sub-
stances. Section 2D1.11 is generally structured to provide offense levels that are tied
to, but less severe than, the base offense levels in §2D1.1 for offenses involving the
final product.
In considering this amendment, the Commission held a hearing on March 13, 2014,
and heard expert testimony from the Executive Branch, including the Attorney Gen-
eral and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons, defense practitioners, state and
local law enforcement, and interested community representatives. The Commission
also received substantial written public comment, including from the Federal judici-
ary, members of Congress, academicians, community organizations, law enforcement
groups, and individual members of the public.
The Commission determined that setting the base offense levels slightly above the
mandatory minimum penalties is no longer necessary to achieve its stated purpose.
Previously, the Commission has stated that “[t]he base offense levels are set at guide-
line ranges slightly higher than the mandatory minimum levels [levels 26 and 32] to
permit some downward adjustment for defendants who plead guilty or otherwise coop-
erate with authorities.” However, changes in the law and recent experience with simi-
lar reductions in base offense levels for crack cocaine offenses indicate that setting the
base offense levels above the mandatory minimum penalties is no longer necessary to
provide adequate incentives to plead guilty or otherwise cooperate with authorities.
In 1994, after the initial selection of levels 26 and 32, Congress enacted the “safety
valve” provision, which applies to certain non-violent drug defendants and allows the
court, without a government motion, to impose a sentence below a statutory mandatory
minimum penalty if the court finds, among other things, that the defendant “has truth-
fully provided to the Government all information and evidence the defendant has con-
cerning the offense or offenses that were part of the same course of conduct or of a
common scheme or plan.” See 18 U.S.C. § 3553(f). The guidelines incorporate the
“safety valve” at §5C1.2 (Limitation on Applicability of Statutory Minimum Sentences
in Certain Cases) and, furthermore, provide a 2-level reduction if the defendant meets
the “safety valve” criteria. See §2D1.1(b)(16).
These statutory and guideline provisions, which are unrelated to the guideline range’s
relationship to the mandatory minimum, provide adequate incentive to plead guilty.
Commission data indicate that defendants charged with a mandatory minimum pen-
alty in fact are more likely to plead guilty if they qualify for the “safety valve” than if
they do not. In fiscal year 2012, drug trafficking defendants charged with a mandatory
minimum penalty had a plea rate of 99.6 percent if they qualified for the “safety valve”
and a plea rate of 93.9 percent if they did not.
Recent experience with similar reductions in the base offense levels for crack cocaine
offenses indicates that the amendment should not negatively affect the rates at which
Amendment 782
72 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
offenders plead guilty or otherwise cooperate with authorities. Similar to this amend-
ment, the Commission in 2007 amended the Drug Quantity Table for cocaine base
(“crack” cocaine) so that the quantities that trigger mandatory minimum penalties
were assigned base offense levels 24 and 30, rather than 26 and 32. See USSG App. C,
Amendment 706 (effective November 1, 2007). In 2010, in implementing the emergency
directive in section 8 of the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010, Pub. L. 111–220, the Commis-
sion moved crack cocaine offenses back to a guideline penalty structure based on lev-
els 26 and 32.
During the period when crack cocaine offenses had a guideline penalty structure based
on levels 24 and 30, the overall rates at which crack cocaine defendants pled guilty
remained stable. Specifically, in the fiscal year before the 2007 amendment took effect,
the plea rate for crack cocaine defendants was 93.1 percent. In the two fiscal years
after the 2007 amendment took effect, the plea rates for such defendants were 95.2 per-
cent and 94.0 percent, respectively. For those same fiscal years, the overall rates at
which crack cocaine defendants received substantial assistance departures under
§5K1.1 (Substantial Assistance to Authorities) were 27.8 percent in the fiscal year be-
fore the 2007 amendment took effect and 25.3 percent and 25.6 percent in the two fiscal
years after the 2007 amendment took effect. This recent experience indicates that this
amendment, which is similar in nature to the 2007 crack cocaine amendment, should
not negatively affect the willingness of defendants to plead guilty or otherwise cooper-
ate with authorities. See 28 U.S.C. § 991(b) (specifying that sentencing policies are to
“reflect, to the extent practicable, advancement in knowledge of human behavior as it
relates to the criminal justice process”).
The amendment also reflects the fact that the guidelines now more adequately differ-
entiate among drug trafficking offenders than when the Drug Quantity Table was ini-
tially established. Since the initial selection of offense levels 26 and 32, the guidelines
have been amended many times — often in response to congressional directives — to
provide a greater emphasis on the defendant’s conduct and role in the offense rather
than on drug quantity. The version of §2D1.1 in the original 1987 Guidelines Manual
contained a single specific offense characteristic: a 2-level enhancement if a firearm or
other dangerous weapon was possessed. Section 2D1.1 in effect at the time of this
amendment contains fourteen enhancements and three downward adjustments (in-
cluding the “mitigating role cap” provided in subsection (a)(5)). These numerous ad-
justments, both increasing and decreasing offense levels based on specific conduct, re-
duce the need to rely on drug quantity in setting the guideline penalties for drug traf-
ficking offenders as a proxy for culpability, and the amendment permits these adjust-
ments to differentiate among offenders more effectively.
The amendment was also motived by the significant overcapacity and costs of the Fed-
eral Bureau of Prisons. The Sentencing Reform Act directs the Commission to ensure
that the sentencing guidelines are “formulated to minimize the likelihood that the Fed-
eral prison population will exceed the capacity of the Federal prisons.” See 28 U.S.C.
§ 994(g). Reducing the federal prison population and the costs of incarceration has be-
come an urgent consideration. The Commission observed that the federal prisons are
now 32 percent overcapacity, and drug trafficking offenders account for approximately
50 percent of the federal prison population (100,114 of 199,810 inmates as of Octo-
ber 26, 2013, for whom the Commission could determine the offense of conviction).
Spending on federal prisons exceeds $6 billion a year, or more than 25 percent of the
entire budget for the Department of Justice. The Commission received testimony from
the Department of Justice and others that spending on federal prisons is now crowding
out resources available for federal prosecutors and law enforcement, aid to state and
Amendment 783
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 73
local law enforcement, crime victim services, and crime prevention programs, all of
which promote public safety.
In response to these concerns, the Commission considered the amendment an appro-
priate step toward alleviating the overcapacity of the federal prisons. Based on an
analysis of the 24,968 offenders sentenced under §2D1.1 in fiscal year 2012, the Com-
mission estimates the amendment will affect the sentences of 17,457 — or 69.9 percent
— of drug trafficking offenders sentenced under §2D1.1, and their average sentence
will be reduced by 11 months — or 17.7 percent — from 62 months to 51 months. The
Commission estimates these sentence reductions will correspond to a reduction in the
federal prison population of approximately 6,500 inmates within five years after its
effective date.
The Commission carefully weighed public safety concerns and, based on past experi-
ence, existing statutory and guideline enhancements, and expert testimony, concluded
that the amendment should not jeopardize public safety. In particular, the Commission
was informed by its studies that compared the recidivism rates for offenders who were
released early as a result of retroactive application of the Commission’s 2007 crack
cocaine amendment with a control group of offenders who served their full terms of
imprisonment. See USSG App. C, Amendment 713 (effective March 3, 2008). The Com-
mission detected no statistically significant difference in the rates of recidivism for the
two groups of offenders after two years, and again after five years. This study suggests
that modest reductions in drug penalties such as those provided by the amendment
will not increase the risk of recidivism.
Furthermore, existing statutory enhancements, such as those available under
18 U.S.C. § 924(c), and guideline enhancements for offenders who possess firearms,
use violence, have an aggravating role in the offense, or are repeat or career offenders,
ensure that the most dangerous or serious offenders will continue to receive appropri-
ately severe sentences. In addition, the Drug Quantity Table as amended still provides
a base offense level of 38 for offenders who traffic the greatest quantities of most drug
types and, therefore, sentences for these offenders will not be reduced. Similarly, the
Drug Quantity Table as amended maintains minimum base offense levels that pre-
clude sentences of straight probation for drug trafficking offenders with small quanti-
ties of most drug types.
Finally, the Commission relied on testimony from the Department of Justice that the
amendment would not undermine public safety or law enforcement initiatives. To the
contrary, the Commission received testimony from several stakeholders that the
amendment would permit resources otherwise dedicated to housing prisoners to be
used to reduce overcrowding, enhance programming designed to reduce the risk of re-
cidivism, and to increase law enforcement and crime prevention efforts, thereby en-
hancing public safety.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2014.
AMENDMENT 783
AMENDMENT: Section 2D1.1(b) is amended by redesignating paragraphs (14) through
(16) as paragraphs (15) through (17), respectively; and by inserting after para-
graph (13) the following new paragraph (14):
Amendment 783
74 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
“(14) If (A) the offense involved the cultivation of marihuana on state or federal land
or while trespassing on tribal or private land; and (B) the defendant receives
an adjustment under §3B1.1 (Aggravating Role), increase by 2 levels.”.
The Commentary to §2D1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 16 by
striking “(b)(14)(D)” and inserting “(b)(15)(D)”; by redesignating Notes 19 through 26
as Notes 20 through 27, respectively; and by inserting after Note 18 the following new
Note 19:
“19. Application of Subsection (b)(14).—Subsection (b)(14) applies to offenses that
involve the cultivation of marihuana on state or federal land or while trespass-
ing on tribal or private land. Such offenses interfere with the ability of others
to safely access and use the area and also pose or risk a range of other harms,
such as harms to the environment.
The enhancements in subsection (b)(13)(A) and (b)(14) may be applied cumu-
latively (added together), as is generally the case when two or more specific
offense characteristics each apply. See §1B1.1 (Application Instructions), Ap-
plication Note 4(A).”;
in the heading of Note 20 (as so redesignated) by striking “(b)(14)” and inserting
“(b)(15)”;
in Note 20(A) (as so redesignated) by striking “(b)(14)(B)” both places such term ap-
pears and inserting “(b)(15)(B)”;
in Note 20(B) (as so redesignated) by striking “(b)(14)(C)” each place such term appears
and inserting “(b)(15)(C)”;
in Note 20(C) (as so redesignated) by striking “(b)(14)(E)” both places such term ap-
pears and inserting “(b)(15)(E)”; and
in Note 21 (as so redesignated) by striking “(b)(16)” each place such term appears and
inserting “(b)(17)”.
The Commentary to §2D1.1 captioned “Background” is amended by striking “(b)(14)”
and inserting “(b)(15)”; and by striking “(b)(15)” and inserting “(b)(16)”.
Section 2D1.14(a)(1) is amended by striking “(b)(16)” and inserting “(b)(17)”.
The Commentary to §3B1.4 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 2 by
striking “(b)(14)(B)” and inserting “(b)(15)(B)”.
The Commentary to §3C1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 7 by
striking “(b)(14)(D)” and inserting “(b)(15)(D)”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment provides increased punishment for certain
defendants involved in marihuana cultivation operations on state or federal land or
while trespassing on tribal or private land. The amendment adds a new specific offense
characteristic at subsection (b)(14) of §2D1.1 (Unlawful Manufacturing, Importing, Ex-
porting or Trafficking (Including Possession with Intent to Commit These Offenses);
Attempt or Conspiracy). The new specific offense characteristic provides an increase of
two levels if the defendant receives an adjustment under §3B1.1 (Aggravating Role)
Amendment 784
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 75
and the offense involved the cultivation of marihuana on state or federal land or while
trespassing on tribal or private land.
The amendment responds to concerns raised by federal and local elected officials, law
enforcement groups, trade groups, environmental advocacy groups and others, espe-
cially in areas of the country where unlawful outdoor marihuana cultivation is occur-
ring with increasing frequency. The concerns included the fact that such operations
typically involve acts such as clearing existing vegetation, diverting natural water
sources for irrigation, using potentially harmful chemicals, killing wild animals, and
leaving trash and debris at the site. The concerns also included the risk to public safety
of marihuana cultivation operations on federal or state land or while trespassing on
tribal or private land. Additionally, when an operation is located on public land or on
private land without the owner’s permission, the operation deprives the public or the
owner of lawful access to and use of the land.
Accordingly, this amendment provides an increase of two levels when a marihuana
cultivation operation is located on state or federal land or while trespassing on tribal
or private land, but only applies to defendants who received an adjustment under
§3B1.1 (Aggravating Role). These defendants are more culpable and have greater de-
cision-making authority in the operation. The amendment also adds commentary in
§2D1.1 at Application Note 19 clarifying that, consistent with ordinary guideline oper-
ation, the new increase may be applied cumulatively with the existing enhancement
at subsection (b)(13)(A) of §2D1.1, which applies if an offense involved certain conduct
relating to hazardous or toxic substances or waste.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2014.
AMENDMENT 784
AMENDMENT: Section 2K2.1(c)(1) is amended by inserting after “firearm or ammuni-
tion” both places it appears the following: “cited in the offense of conviction”.
The Commentary to §2K2.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 14 by
striking “ ‘In Connection With’.—” and inserting “Application of Subsections (b)(6)(B)
and (c)(1).—”;
in Note 14(A) by adding at the end the following: “However, subsection (c)(1) contains
the additional requirement that the firearm or ammunition be cited in the offense of
conviction.”;
in Note 14(B) by striking “application of subsections (b)(6)(B) and (c)(1)” and inserting
“application of subsections (b)(6)(B) and, if the firearm was cited in the offense of con-
viction, (c)(1)”;
and by adding at the end of Note 14 the following:
“(E) Relationship Between the Instant Offense and the Other Offense.—In deter-
mining whether subsections (b)(6)(B) and (c)(1) apply, the court must consider
the relationship between the instant offense and the other offense, consistent
with relevant conduct principles. See §1B1.3(a)(1)–(4) and accompanying com-
mentary.
Amendment 784
76 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
In determining whether subsection (c)(1) applies, the court must also consider
whether the firearm used in the other offense was a firearm cited in the offense
of conviction.
For example:
(i) Firearm Cited in the Offense of Conviction. Defendant A’s offense of
conviction is for unlawfully possessing a shotgun on October 15. The
court determines that, on the preceding February 10, Defendant A
used the shotgun in connection with a robbery. Ordinarily, under these
circumstances, subsection (b)(6)(B) applies, and the cross reference in
subsection (c)(1) also applies if it results in a greater offense level.
Ordinarily, the unlawful possession of the shotgun on February 10 will
be ‘part of the same course of conduct or common scheme or plan’ as
the unlawful possession of the same shotgun on October 15.
See §1B1.3(a)(2) and accompanying commentary (including, in partic-
ular, the factors discussed in Application Note 9 to §1B1.3). The use of
the shotgun ‘in connection with’ the robbery is relevant conduct be-
cause it is a factor specified in subsections (b)(6)(B) and (c)(1).
See §1B1.3(a)(4) (‘any other information specified in the applicable
guideline’).
(ii) Firearm Not Cited in the Offense of Conviction. Defendant B’s offense
of conviction is for unlawfully possessing a shotgun on October 15. The
court determines that, on the preceding February 10, Defendant B un-
lawfully possessed a handgun (not cited in the offense of conviction)
and used the handgun in connection with a robbery.
Subsection (b)(6)(B). In determining whether subsection (b)(6)(B) ap-
plies, the threshold question for the court is whether the two unlawful
possession offenses (the shotgun on October 15 and the handgun on
February 10) were ‘part of the same course of conduct or common
scheme or plan’. See §1B1.3(a)(2) and accompanying commentary (in-
cluding, in particular, the factors discussed in Application Note 9 to
§1B1.3).
If they were, then the handgun possession offense is relevant conduct
to the shotgun possession offense, and the use of the handgun ‘in con-
nection with’ the robbery is relevant conduct because it is a factor spec-
ified in subsection (b)(6)(B). See §1B1.3(a)(4) (‘any other information
specified in the applicable guideline’). Accordingly, subsection (b)(6)(B)
applies.
On the other hand, if the court determines that the two unlawful pos-
session offenses were not ‘part of the same course of conduct or common
scheme or plan,’ then the handgun possession offense is not relevant
conduct to the shotgun possession offense and subsection (b)(6)(B) does
not apply.
Subsection (c)(1). Under these circumstances, the cross reference in
subsection (c)(1) does not apply, because the handgun was not cited in
the offense of conviction.”.
Amendment 784
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 77
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment addresses cases in which the defendant is
convicted of a firearms offense (in particular, being a felon in possession of a firearm)
and also possessed a firearm in connection with another offense, such as robbery or
attempted murder.
In such a case, the defendant is sentenced under the firearms guideline, §2K2.1 (Un-
lawful Receipt, Possession, or Transportation of Firearms or Ammunition; Prohibited
Transactions Involving Firearms or Ammunition). If the defendant possessed any fire-
arm in connection with another felony offense, subsection (b)(6)(B) provides a 4-level
enhancement and a minimum offense level of 18. If the defendant possessed any fire-
arm in connection with another offense, subsection (c)(1) provides a cross reference to
the offense guideline applicable to the other offense, if it results in a higher offense
level. (For example, if the defendant possessed any firearm in connection with a rob-
bery, a cross reference to the robbery guideline may apply.)
This amendment is a result of the Commission’s review of the operation of subsections
(b)(6)(B) and (c)(1). The review was prompted in part because circuits have been fol-
lowing a range of approaches in determining whether these provisions apply. Several
circuits have taken the view that subsections (b)(6)(B) and (c)(1) apply only if the other
offense is a “groupable” offense under §3D1.2(d). See, e.g., United States v. Horton,
693 F.3d 463, 478–79 (4th Cir. 2012) (felon in possession used a firearm in connection
with a murder, but the cross reference does not apply because murder is not “groupa-
ble”); United States v. Settle, 414 F.3d 629, 632–33 (6th Cir. 2005) (attempted murder);
United States v. Jones, 313 F.3d 1019, 1023 n.3 (7th Cir. 2002) (murder); United States
v. Williams, 431 F.3d 767, 772–73 & n.9 (11th Cir. 2005) (aggravated assault).
But see United States v. Kulick, 629 F.3d 165, 170 (3d Cir. 2010) (felon in possession
used a firearm in connection with extortion; the cross reference may apply even though
extortion is not “groupable”); United States v. Gonzales, 996 F.2d 88, 92 n.6 (5th Cir.
1993) (relevant conduct principles do not restrict the application of subsec-
tion (b)(6)(B)); United States v. Outley, 348 F.3d 476 (5th Cir. 2003) (relevant conduct
principles do not restrict the application of subsection (c)(1)).
The amendment clarifies how relevant conduct principles operate in determining
whether subsections (b)(6)(B) and (c)(1) apply. Subsections (b)(6)(B) and (c)(1) are not
intended to apply only when the other felony offense is a “groupable” offense. Such an
approach would result in unwarranted disparities, with defendants who possess a fire-
arm in connection with a “groupable” offense (such as a drug offense) being subject to
higher penalties than defendants who possess a firearm in connection with a “non-
groupable” offense (such as murder or robbery). Instead, the central question for the
court in these cases is whether the defendant’s two firearms offenses — the firearms
offense of conviction, and his unlawful possession of a firearm in connection with the
other felony offense — were “part of the same course of conduct or common scheme or
plan.” See §1B1.3(a)(2). The amendment adds examples to the commentary to clarify
how relevant conduct principles are intended to operate in this context.
The amendment also responds to concerns regarding the impact of subsection (c)(1),
particularly in cases in which the defendant was convicted of unlawfully possessing a
firearm on one occasion but was found to have possessed a different firearm on another
occasion in connection with another, more serious, offense. Because unlawfully pos-
sessing a firearm is an offense based on a status (i.e., being a felon) that can continue
for many years, the cross reference at subsection (c)(1) may, in effect, expose such a
defendant to the highest offense level of any crime he may have committed at any time,
regardless of its connection to the instant offense.
Amendment 785
78 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
While relevant conduct principles provide a limitation on the scope of subsection (c)(1)
(and, as discussed above, this amendment clarifies how those principles operate in this
context), the Commission determined that a further limitation on the scope of subsec-
tion (c)(1) is appropriate. Specifically, the instant offense and the other offense must
be related to each other by, at a minimum, having an identifiable firearm in common.
Accordingly, the amendment revises the cross reference so that it applies only to the
particular firearm or firearms cited in the offense of conviction.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2014.
AMENDMENT 785
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §2L1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in
Note 5 after “vehicle” by striking the comma and inserting a semicolon; after “vessel”
by striking “, or” and inserting a semicolon; and after “inhumane condition” by insert-
ing the following: “; or guiding persons through, or abandoning persons in, a dangerous
or remote geographic area without adequate food, water, clothing, or protection from
the elements”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment accounts for the risks of death, injury,
starvation, dehydration, or exposure that aliens potentially face when transported
through dangerous and remote geographical areas, e.g., along the southern border of
the United States.
Section 2L1.1 (Smuggling, Transporting, or Harboring an Unlawful Alien) currently
has an enhancement at subsection (b)(6), which provides for a 2-level increase and a
minimum offense level of 18, for intentionally or recklessly creating a substantial risk
of death or serious bodily injury to another person. The Commentary for subsec-
tion (b)(6), Application Note 5, explains that §2L1.1(b)(6) may apply to a “wide variety
of conduct” and provides as examples “transporting persons in the trunk or engine
compartment of a motor vehicle, carrying substantially more passengers than the
rated capacity of a motor vehicle or vessel, or harboring persons in a crowded, danger-
ous, or inhumane condition.”
One case that illustrates the concerns addressed in this amendment is United States
v. Mateo Garza, 541 F.3d 290 (5th Cir. 2008), in which the Fifth Circuit held that the
reckless endangerment enhancement at §2L1.1(b)(6) does not per se apply to trans-
porting aliens through the South Texas brush country, and must instead be applied
based on the specific facts presented to the court. The Fifth Circuit emphasized that it
is not enough to say, as the district court had, that traversing an entire geographical
region is inherently dangerous, but that it must be dangerous on the facts presented
to and used by the district court. The Fifth Circuit identified such pertinent facts from
its prior case law as the length of the journey, the temperature, whether the aliens
were provided food and water and allowed rest periods, and whether the aliens suffered
injuries and death. See, e.g., United States v. Garcia-Guerrero, 313 F.3d 892 (5th Cir.
2002). Additional facts that have supported the enhancement include: whether the al-
iens were abandoned en route, the time of year during which the journey took place,
the distance traveled, and whether the aliens were adequately clothed for the journey.
See, e.g., United States v. Chapa, 362 Fed. App’x 411 (5th Cir. 2010); United States v.
De Jesus-Ojeda, 515 F.3d 434 (5th Cir. 2008); United States v. Hernandez-Pena,
267 Fed. App’x 367 (5th Cir. 2008); United States v. Rodriguez-Cruz, 255 F.3d 1054
(9th Cir. 2001).
Amendment 786
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 79
The amendment adds to Application Note 5 the following new example of the conduct
to which §2L1.1(b)(6) could apply: “or guiding persons through, or abandoning persons
in, a dangerous or remote geographic area without adequate food, water, clothing, or
protection from the elements.” The Commission determined that this new example will
clarify application of subsection (b)(6), highlight the potential risks in these types of
cases, provide guidance for the courts to determine whether to apply the enhancement,
and promote uniformity in sentencing by providing factors to consider when determin-
ing whether to apply §2L1.1(b)(6).
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2014.
AMENDMENT 786
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §5D1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in
Note 1, in the paragraph that begins “ ‘Sex offense’ means”, in subparagraph (A), by
striking “(ii) chapter 109B of such title;”, and by redesignating clauses (iii) through (vi)
as clauses (ii) through (v), respectively; in subparagraph (B) by striking “(vi)” and in-
serting “(v)”; and by adding at the end as the last sentence the following: “Such term
does not include an offense under 18 U.S.C. § 2250 (Failure to register).”.
The Commentary to §5D1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended by adding at the
end the following new Note 6:
“6. Application of Subsection (c).—Subsection (c) specifies how a statutorily re-
quired minimum term of supervised release may affect the minimum term of
supervised release provided by the guidelines.
For example, if subsection (a) provides a range of two years to five years, but
the relevant statute requires a minimum term of supervised release of three
years and a maximum term of life, the term of supervised release provided by
the guidelines is restricted by subsection (c) to three years to five years. Simi-
larly, if subsection (a) provides a range of two years to five years, but the rele-
vant statute requires a minimum term of supervised release of five years and
a maximum term of life, the term of supervised release provided by the guide-
lines is five years.
The following example illustrates the interaction of subsections (a) and (c)
when subsection (b) is also involved. In this example, subsection (a) provides a
range of two years to five years; the relevant statute requires a minimum term
of supervised release of five years and a maximum term of life; and the offense
is a sex offense under subsection (b). The effect of subsection (b) is to raise the
maximum term of supervised release from five years (as provided by subsec-
tion (a)) to life, yielding a range of two years to life. The term of supervised
release provided by the guidelines is then restricted by subsection (c) to five
years to life. In this example, a term of supervised release of more than five
years would be a guideline sentence. In addition, subsection (b) contains a pol-
icy statement recommending that the maximum — a life term of supervised
release — be imposed.”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment resolves a circuit conflict and a related
guideline application issue about the calculation of terms of supervised release. The
Amendment 786
80 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
circuit conflict involves defendants sentenced under statutes providing for mandatory
minimum terms of supervised release, while the application issue relates specifically
to defendants convicted of failure to register as a sex offender, in violation of 18 U.S.C.
§ 2250.
The guideline term of supervised release is determined by §5D1.2 (Term of Supervised
Release). Section 5D1.2(a) sets forth general rules for determining the guideline term
of supervised release, based on the statutory classification of the offense.
See §5D1.2(a)(1)–(3); 18 U.S.C. § 3559 (sentencing classification of offenses). For cer-
tain terrorism-related and sex offenses, §5D1.2(b) operates to replace the top end of
the guideline term calculated under subsection (a) with a life term of supervised re-
lease. In the case of a “sex offense,” as defined by Application Note 1 to §5D1.2, a policy
statement recommends that a life term of supervised release be imposed.
See §5D1.2(b), p.s. Finally, §5D1.2(c) states that “the term of supervised release im-
posed shall be not less than any statutorily required term of supervised release.”
When a Statutory Minimum Term of Supervised Release Applies
First, there appear to be differences among the circuits in how to calculate the guide-
line term of supervised release when there is a statutory minimum term of supervised
release. These cases involve the meaning of subsection (c) and its interaction with sub-
section (a).
The Seventh Circuit has held that when there is a statutory minimum term of super-
vised release, the statutory minimum term becomes the bottom of the guideline range
(replacing the bottom of the term provided by (a)) and, if the statutory minimum equals
or exceeds the top of the guideline term provided by subsection (a), the guideline
“range” becomes a single point at the statutory minimum. United States v. Gibbs,
578 F.3d 694, 695 (7th Cir. 2009). Thus, if subsection (a) provides a range of three to
five years, but the statute provides a range of five years to life, the “range” is precisely
five years. Gibbs involved a drug offense for which 21 U.S.C. § 841(b) required a su-
pervised release term of five years to life. See also United States v. Goodwin, 717 F.3d
511, 519–20 (7th Cir. 2013) (applying Gibbs to a case involving a failure to register for
which 18 U.S.C. § 3583(k) required a supervised release term of five years to life).
These cases are in tension with the approach of the Eighth Circuit in United States v.
Deans, 590 F.3d 907, 911 (8th Cir. 2010). In Deans, the range calculated under sub-
section (a) was two to three years of supervised release. However, the relevant statute,
21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1)(C), provided a range of three years to life. Under the Seventh
Circuit’s approach in Gibbs, the guideline “range” would be precisely three years. With-
out reference to Gibbs, the Eighth Circuit in Deans indicated that the statutory re-
quirement “trumps” subsection (a), and the guideline range becomes the statutory
range — three years to life. 590 F.3d at 911. Thus, the district court’s imposition of five
years of supervised release “was neither an upward departure nor procedural er-
ror.” Id.
The amendment adopts the approach of the Seventh Circuit in Gibbs and Goodwin.
The amendment provides a new Application Note and examples explaining that, under
subsection (c), a statutorily required minimum term of supervised release operates to
restrict the low end of the guideline term of supervised release.
The Commission determined that this resolution was most consistent with its statu-
tory obligation to determine the “appropriate length” of supervised release terms, and
with how a statutory minimum term of imprisonment operates to restrict the range of
Amendment 786
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 81
imprisonment provided by the guidelines. See 28 U.S.C. § 994(a)(1)(c); USSG
§5G1.1(a). This outcome is also consistent with the Commission’s 2010 report on su-
pervised release, which found that most supervised release violations occur in the first
year after release from incarceration. See U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, Federal Offenders
Sentenced to Supervised Release, at 63 & n. 265 (July 2010). If an offender shows
non-compliance during the initial term of supervised release, the court may extend the
term of supervision up to the statutory maximum, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3583(e)(2).
When the Defendant is Convicted of Failure to Register as a Sex Offender
Second, there are differences among the circuits over how to calculate the guideline
range of supervised release when a defendant is convicted, under 18 U.S.C. § 2250, of
failing to register as a sex offender. That offense carries a statutory minimum term of
supervised release of at least five years, with a term up to life permitted. See 18 U.S.C.
§ 3583(k).
There is an application issue about when, if at all, such an offense is a “sex offense” for
purposes of subsection (b) of §5D1.2. If a failure to register is a sex offense, then sub-
section (b) specifically provides for a term of supervised release of anywhere from the
minimum provided by subsection (a) to the maximum provided by statute (i.e., life),
and a policy statement contained within subsection (b) recommends that the maximum
be imposed. See §5D1.2(b), p.s. Another effect of the determination is that, if failure to
register is a “sex offense,” the guidelines recommend that special conditions of super-
vised release also be imposed, such as participating in a sex offender monitoring pro-
gram and submitting to warrantless searches. See §5D1.3(d)(7).
Application Note 1 defines “sex offense” to mean, among other things, “an offense, per-
petrated against a minor, under” chapter 109B of title 18 (the only section of which is
Section 2250). Circuits have reached different conclusions about the effect of this defi-
nition.
The Seventh Circuit has held that a failure to register can never be a “sex offense”
within the meaning of Note 1. United States v. Goodwin, 717 F.3d 511, 518–20 (7th Cir.
2013); see also United States v. Segura, 747 F.3d 323, 329 (5th Cir. 2014) (agreeing
with Goodwin). The court in Goodwin reasoned that there is no specific victim of a
failure to register, and therefore a failure to register is never “perpetrated against a
minor” and can never be a “sex offense” — rendering the definition’s inclusion of of-
fenses under chapter 109B “surplusage.” 717 F.3d at 518. In an unpublished opinion,
the Second Circuit has determined that a failure to register was not a “sex offense.”
See United States v. Herbert, 428 Fed. App’x 37 (2d Cir. 2011). In both cases, the gov-
ernment argued for these outcomes, confessing error below.
There are unpublished decisions in other circuits that have reached different results,
without discussion. In those cases, the defendant had a prior sex offense against a
minor, and the circuit court determined that the failure to register was a “sex offense.”
See United States v. Zeiders, 440 Fed. App’x 699, 701 (11th Cir. 2011); United States
v. Nelson, 400 Fed. App’x 781 (4th Cir. 2010).
The Commission agrees with the Seventh Circuit that failure to register is not an of-
fense that is “perpetrated against a minor.” In addition, expert testimony and research
reviewed by the Commission indicated that commission of a failure-to-register offense
is not correlated with sex offense recidivism. The amendment resolves the application
Amendment 787
82 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
issue by amending the commentary to §5D1.2 to clarify that offenses under Sec-
tion 2250 are not “sex offenses.”
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2014.
AMENDMENT 787
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §2L1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended by
redesignating Note 8 as Note 9 and by inserting after Note 7 the following new Note 8:
“8. Departure Based on Time Served in State Custody.—In a case in which the
defendant is located by immigration authorities while the defendant is serving
time in state custody, whether pre- or post-conviction, for a state offense, the
time served is not covered by an adjustment under §5G1.3(b) and, accordingly,
is not covered by a departure under §5K2.23 (Discharged Terms of Imprison-
ment). See §5G1.3(a). In such a case, the court may consider whether a depar-
ture is appropriate to reflect all or part of the time served in state custody, from
the time immigration authorities locate the defendant until the service of the
federal sentence commences, that the court determines will not be credited to
the federal sentence by the Bureau of Prisons. Any such departure should be
fashioned to achieve a reasonable punishment for the instant offense.
Such a departure should be considered only in cases where the departure is
not likely to increase the risk to the public from further crimes of the defend-
ant. In determining whether such a departure is appropriate, the court should
consider, among other things, (A) whether the defendant engaged in additional
criminal activity after illegally reentering the United States; (B) the serious-
ness of any such additional criminal activity, including (1) whether the defend-
ant used violence or credible threats of violence or possessed a firearm or other
dangerous weapon (or induced another person to do so) in connection with the
criminal activity, (2) whether the criminal activity resulted in death or serious
bodily injury to any person, and (3) whether the defendant was an organizer,
leader, manager, or supervisor of others in the criminal activity; and (C) the
seriousness of the defendant’s other criminal history.”.
The Commentary to §2X5.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
inserting after “§5G1.3 (Imposition of a Sentence on a Defendant Subject to an Undis-
charged Term of Imprisonment” the following: “or Anticipated State Term of Impris-
onment”.
Section 5G1.3 is amended in the heading by inserting after “Imposition of a Sentence
on a Defendant Subject to an Undischarged Term of Imprisonment” the following:
“or Anticipated State Term of Imprisonment”.
Section 5G1.3 is amended in subsection (b) by striking “and that was the basis for an
increase in the offense level for the instant offense under Chapter Two (Offense Con-
duct) or Chapter Three (Adjustments)”; by redesignating subsection (c) as (d); and by
inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection (c):
“(c) If subsection (a) does not apply, and a state term of imprisonment is antici-
pated to result from another offense that is relevant conduct to the instant
offense of conviction under the provisions of subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3)
Amendment 787
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 83
of §1B1.3 (Relevant Conduct), the sentence for the instant offense shall be im-
posed to run concurrently to the anticipated term of imprisonment.”.
The Commentary to §5G1.3 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 2(A) by
striking “(i)” and by striking “; and (ii) has resulted in an increase in the Chapter Two
or Three offense level for the instant offense”;
in Note 2(B) by striking “increased the Chapter Two or Three offense level for the in-
stant offense but”;
by redesignating Notes 3 and 4 as Notes 4 and 5, respectively, and inserting after
Note 2 the following new Note 3:
“3. Application of Subsection (c).—Subsection (c) applies to cases in which the fed-
eral court anticipates that, after the federal sentence is imposed, the defendant
will be sentenced in state court and serve a state sentence before being trans-
ferred to federal custody for federal imprisonment. In such a case, where the
other offense is relevant conduct to the instant offense of conviction under the
provisions of subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) of §1B1.3 (Relevant Conduct),
the sentence for the instant offense shall be imposed to run concurrently to the
anticipated term of imprisonment.”;
and in Note 4 (as so redesignated), in the heading, by striking “(c)” and inserting “(d)”;
in each of subparagraphs (A), (B), (C), and (D) by striking “(c)” each place such term
appears and inserting “(d)”; and in subparagraph (E) by striking “subsection (c)” both
places such term appears and inserting “subsection (d)”, and by striking “§5G1.3 (c)”
and inserting “§5G1.3(d)”.
Section 5K2.23 is amended by inserting after “Imposition of a Sentence on a Defendant
Subject to Undischarged Term of Imprisonment” the following: “or Anticipated Term
of Imprisonment”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This multi-part amendment addresses certain cases in
which the defendant is subject to another term of imprisonment, such as an undis-
charged term of imprisonment or an anticipated term of imprisonment. The guideline
generally applicable to undischarged terms of imprisonment is §5G1.3 (Imposition of
a Sentence on a Defendant Subject to an Undischarged Term of Imprisonment).
Section 5G1.3 identifies three categories of cases in which a federal defendant is also
subject to an undischarged term of imprisonment. First, there are cases in which the
federal offense was committed while the defendant was serving the undischarged term
of imprisonment (including work release, furlough, or escape status). In these cases,
the federal sentence is to be imposed consecutively to the remainder of the undis-
charged term of imprisonment. See §5G1.3(a). Second, assuming subsection (a) does
not apply, there are cases in which the conduct involved in the undischarged term of
imprisonment is related to the conduct involved in the federal offense — specifically,
the offense for which the defendant is serving an undischarged term of imprisonment
is relevant conduct under subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) of §1B1.3 (Relevant Con-
duct) — and was the basis for an increase in the offense level under Chapter Two or
Chapter Three. In these cases, the court is directed to adjust the federal sentence to
account for the time already served on the undischarged term of imprisonment (if the
Bureau of Prisons will not itself provide credit for that time already served) and is
further directed to run the federal sentence concurrently with the remainder of the
sentence for the undischarged term of imprisonment. See §5G1.3(b). Finally, in all
Amendment 787
84 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
other cases involving an undischarged state term of imprisonment, the court may im-
pose the federal sentence concurrently, partially concurrently, or consecutively, to
achieve a reasonable punishment for the federal offense. See §5G1.3(c), p.s.
Within the category of cases covered by subsection (b), where the conduct involved in
the undischarged term of imprisonment is related to the federal offense conduct, the
Commission considered whether the benefit of subsection (b) should continue to be
limited to cases in which the offense conduct related to the undischarged term of im-
prisonment resulted in a Chapter Two or Three increase. The Commission determined
that this limitation added complexity to the guidelines and may lead to unwarranted
disparities. For example, a federal drug trafficking defendant who is serving an undis-
charged state term of imprisonment for a small amount of a controlled substance that
is relevant conduct to the federal offense may not receive the benefit of subsection (b)
because the amount of the controlled substance may not be sufficient to increase the
offense level under Chapter Two. In contrast, a federal drug trafficking defendant who
is serving an undischarged state term of imprisonment for a large amount of a con-
trolled substance that is relevant conduct to the federal offense may be more likely to
receive the benefit of subsection (b) because the amount of the controlled substance
may be more likely to increase the offense level under Chapter Two. The amendment
amends §5G1.3(b) to require a court to adjust the sentence and impose concurrent sen-
tences in any case in which the prior offense is relevant conduct under the provisions
of §1B1.3(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3), regardless of whether the conduct from the prior offense
formed the basis for a Chapter Two or Chapter Three increase. The Commission deter-
mined that this amendment will simplify the operation of §5G1.3(b) and will also ad-
dress concerns that the requirement that the relevant conduct increase the offense
level under Chapters Two or Three is somewhat arbitrary.
Second, the amendment addresses cases in which there is an anticipated, but not yet
imposed, state term of imprisonment that is relevant conduct to the instant offense of
conviction under the provisions of subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) of §1B1.3 (Relevant
Conduct). This amendment creates a new subsection (c) at §5G1.3 that directs the court
to impose the sentence for the instant federal offense to run concurrently with the an-
ticipated but not yet imposed period of imprisonment if §5G1.3(a) does not apply.
This amendment is a further response to the Supreme Court’s decision in Setser v.
United States, 132 S. Ct. 1463 (2012). Last year, the Commission amended the Back-
ground Commentary to §5G1.3 to provide heightened awareness of the court’s author-
ity under Setser. See USSG App. C, Amend. 776 (effective November 1, 2013). In Set-
ser, the Supreme Court held that a federal sentencing court has the authority to order
that a federal term of imprisonment run concurrent with, or consecutive to, an antici-
pated but not yet imposed state sentence. This amendment reflects the Commission’s
determination that the concurrent sentence benefits of subsection (b) of §5G1.3 should
be available not only in cases in which the state sentence has already been imposed at
the time of federal sentencing (as subsection (b) provides), but also in cases in which
the state sentence is anticipated but has not yet been imposed, as long as the other
criteria in subsection (b) are satisfied (i.e., the state offense is relevant conduct under
subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) of §1B1.3, and subsection (a) of §5G1.3 does not ap-
ply). By requiring courts to impose a concurrent sentence in these cases, the amend-
ment reduces disparities between defendants whose state sentences have already been
imposed and those whose state sentences have not yet been imposed. The amendment
also promotes certainty and consistency.
Third, the amendment addresses certain cases in which the defendant is an alien and
is subject to an undischarged term of imprisonment. The amendment provides a new
Amendment 788
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 85
departure provision in §2L1.2 (Unlawfully Entering or Remaining in the United
States) for cases in which the defendant is located by immigration authorities while
the defendant is in state custody, whether pre- or post- conviction, for a state offense
unrelated to the federal illegal reentry offense. In such a case, the time served is not
covered by an adjustment under §5G1.3(b) and, accordingly, is not covered by a depar-
ture under §5K2.23 (Discharged Terms of Imprisonment). The new departure provi-
sion states that, in such a case, the court may consider whether a departure is appro-
priate to reflect all or part of the time served in state custody for the unrelated offense,
from the time federal immigration authorities locate the defendant until the service of
the federal sentence commences, that the court determines will not be credited to the
federal sentence by the Bureau of Prisons. The new departure provision also sets forth
factors for the court to consider in determining whether to provide such a departure,
and states that a departure should be considered only if the departure will not increase
the risk to the public from further crimes of the defendant.
This amendment addresses concerns that the amount of time a defendant serves in
state custody after being located by immigration authorities may be somewhat arbi-
trary. Several courts have recognized a downward departure to account for the delay
between when the defendant is “found” by immigration authorities and when the de-
fendant is brought into federal custody. See, e.g., United States v. Sanchez-Rodriguez,
161 F.3d 556, 563–64 (9th Cir. 1998) (affirming downward departure on the basis that,
because of the delay in proceeding with the illegal reentry case, the defendant lost the
opportunity to serve a greater portion of his state sentence concurrently with his illegal
reentry sentence); United States v. Barrera-Saucedo, 385 F.3d 533, 537 (5th Cir. 2004)
(holding that “it is permissible for a sentencing court to grant a downward departure
to an illegal alien for all or part of time served in state custody from the time immigra-
tion authorities locate the defendant until he is taken into federal custody”); see also
United States v. Los Santos, 283 F.3d 422, 428–29 (2d Cir. 2002) (departure appropri-
ate if the delay was either in bad faith or unreasonable). The amendment provides
guidance to the courts in the determination of an appropriate sentence in such a case.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2014.
AMENDMENT 788
AMENDMENT: Section 1B1.10, as amended by Amendment 780, is further amended in
subsection (d) by striking “and” and by inserting “, and 782 (subject to subsection
(e)(1))” before the period at the end;
and by adding at the end the following new subsection (e):
“(e) Special Instruction.—
(1) The court shall not order a reduced term of imprisonment based on
Amendment 782 unless the effective date of the court’s order is Novem-
ber 1, 2015, or later.”.
The Commentary to 1B1.10 captioned “Application Notes”, as amended by Amend-
ment 780, is further amended by redesignating Notes 6 and 7 as Notes 7 and 8, respec-
tively;
and by inserting after Note 5 the following new Note 6:
Amendment 788
86 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
“6. Application to Amendment 782.—As specified in subsection (d) and (e)(1),
Amendment 782 (generally revising the Drug Quantity Table and chemical
quantity tables across drug and chemical types) is covered by this policy state-
ment only in cases in which the order reducing the defendant’s term of impris-
onment has an effective date of November 1, 2015, or later.
A reduction based on retroactive application of Amendment 782 that does not
comply with the requirement that the order take effect on November 1, 2015,
or later is not consistent with this policy statement and therefore is not author-
ized under 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(2).
Subsection (e)(1) does not preclude the court from conducting sentence reduc-
tion proceedings and entering orders under 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(2) and this pol-
icy statement before November 1, 2015, provided that any order reducing the
defendant’s term of imprisonment has an effective date of November 1, 2015,
or later.”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment expands the listing in §1B1.10(d) to imple-
ment the directive in 28 U.S.C. § 994(u) with respect to guideline amendments that
may be considered for retroactive application. The Commission has determined that
Amendment 782, subject to the limitation in new §1B1.10(e) delaying the effective date
of sentence reduction orders until November 1, 2015, should be applied retroactively.
Amendment 782 reduced by two levels the offense levels assigned to the quantities
that trigger the statutory mandatory minimum penalties in §2D1.1, and made parallel
changes to §2D1.11. Under the applicable standards set forth in the background com-
mentary to §1B1.10, the Commission considers the following factors, among others:
(1) the purpose of the amendment, (2) the magnitude of the change in the guideline
range made by the amendment, and (3) the difficulty of applying the amendment ret-
roactively. See §1B1.10, comment. (backg’d.). Applying those standards to Amend-
ment 782, the Commission determined that, among other factors:
(1) The purposes of the amendment are to reflect the Commission’s determination
that setting the base offense levels above mandatory minimum penalties is no
longer necessary and that a reduction would be an appropriate step toward
alleviating the overcapacity of the federal prisons. See 28 U.S.C. § 994(g) (re-
quiring the Commission to formulate guidelines to “minimize the likelihood
that the Federal prison population will exceed the capacity of the Federal pris-
ons”).
(2) The number of cases potentially involved is large, and the magnitude of the
change in the guideline range is significant. The Commission determined that
an estimated 46,000 offenders may benefit from retroactive application of
Amendment 782 subject to the limitation in §1B1.10(e), and the average sen-
tence reduction would be approximately 18 percent.
(3) The administrative burdens of applying Amendment 782 retroactively are sig-
nificant but manageable given the one-year delay in the effective date, which
allows courts and agencies more time to prepare. This determination was in-
formed by testimony at the Commission’s June 10, 2014 public hearing on ret-
roactivity and by other public comment received by the Commission.
Amendment 789
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 87
The Commission determined that public safety, among other factors, requires a limi-
tation on retroactive application of Amendment 782. In light of the large number of
cases potentially involved, the Commission determined that the agencies of the federal
criminal justice system responsible for the offenders’ reentry into society need time to
prepare, and to help the offenders prepare, for that reentry. For example, the Bureau
of Prisons has the responsibility under 18 U.S.C. § 3624(c) to ensure, to the extent
practicable, that the defendant will spend a portion of his or her term of imprisonment
under conditions that will afford the defendant a reasonable opportunity to adjust to
and prepare for his or her reentry into the community. The Commission received tes-
timony indicating that some offenders released pursuant to earlier retroactive guide-
line amendments had been released without having had this opportunity. In addition,
for many of the defendants potentially involved, their sentence includes a term of su-
pervised release after imprisonment. The judiciary and its probation officers will have
the responsibility under 18 U.S.C. § 3624(e) to supervise those defendants when they
are released by the Bureau of Prisons. The Commission received testimony from the
Criminal Law Committee of the Judicial Conference of the United States that a delay
would permit courts and probation offices to prepare to effectively supervise this in-
creased number of defendants.
The Commission concluded that a one-year delay in the effective date of any orders
granting sentence reductions under Amendment 782 is needed (1) to give courts ade-
quate time to obtain and review the information necessary to make an individualized
determination in each case of whether a sentence reduction is appropriate, (2) to en-
sure that, to the extent practicable, all offenders who are to be released have the op-
portunity to participate in reentry programs and transitional services, such as place-
ment in halfway houses, while still in the custody of the Bureau of Prisons, which in-
creases their likelihood of successful reentry to society and thereby promotes public
safety, and (3) to permit those agencies that will be responsible for offenders after their
release to prepare for the increased responsibility. Therefore, the Commission added a
Special Instruction at subsection (e) providing that a reduced term of imprisonment
based on retroactive application of Amendment 782 shall not be ordered unless the
effective date of the court’s order is November 1, 2015, or later. An application note
clarifies that this special instruction does not preclude the court from conducting sen-
tence reduction proceedings before November 1, 2015, as long as any order reducing
the defendant’s term of imprisonment has an effective date of November 1, 2015, or
later. As a result, offenders cannot be released from custody pursuant to retroactive
application of Amendment 782 before November 1, 2015.
In addition, public safety will be considered in every case because §1B1.10 requires the
court, in determining whether and to what extent a reduction in the defendant’s term
of imprisonment is warranted, to consider the nature and seriousness of the danger to
any person or the community that may be posed by such a reduction. See §1B1.10,
comment. (n.1(B)(ii)).
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2014.
AMENDMENT 789
Amendment: Chapter One, Part A, Subpart 2 (Continuing Evolution and Role of the
Guidelines) is amended by striking “127 S. Ct. 2456” and inserting “551 U.S. 338”; by
striking “2463” and inserting “347–48”; by striking “wholesale,’ id.,” and inserting
“wholesale[,]’ id. at 348”; by striking “Id. at 2464” the first time it appears and inserting
Amendment 790
88 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
“Id. at 350”; by striking “127 S. Ct. at 2465” both places such term appears and insert-
ing “551 U.S. at 351”; by striking “128 S. Ct. 586, 596” and inserting “552 U.S. 38, 49”;
by striking “128 S. Ct. at 597” and inserting “552 U.S. at 51”; by striking “Id. at 2464”
the second time it appears and inserting “Rita, 551 U.S. at 350”; by striking “128 S. Ct.
at 594” and inserting “552 U.S. at 46”; by striking “128 S. Ct. 558” and inserting
“552 U.S. 85”; and by striking “571” and inserting “103”.
The Commentary to §1B1.1 captioned “Background” is amended by striking “128 S. Ct.
2198, 2200–03” and inserting “553 U.S. 708, 709–16”.
The Commentary to §1B1.10 captioned “Background”, as amended by Amendment 780,
is further amended by striking “130 S. Ct. 2683” and inserting “560 U.S. 817”.
The Commentary to §2M3.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking “50 U.S.C. § 435 note” and inserting “50 U.S.C. § 3161 note”.
The Commentary to §5G1.3 captioned “Application Notes”, as amended by Amend-
ment 787, is further amended in Note 2(A) by striking “subsection (c)” and inserting
“subsection (d)”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment makes certain technical changes to the
Introduction and the Commentary in the Guidelines Manual.
First, the amendment makes clerical changes to provide United States Reports cita-
tions for certain Supreme Court cases. The changes are made to—
(1) Subpart 2 of Part A of Chapter One (Introduction, Authority, and General Ap-
plication Principles);
(2) the Background Commentary to §1B1.1 (Application Instructions); and
(3) the Background Commentary to §1B1.10 (Reduction in Term of Imprisonment
as a Result of Amended Guideline Range (Policy Statement)).
Second, the amendment makes a clerical change to Application Note 1 to §2M3.1
(Gathering or Transmitting National Defense Information to Aid a Foreign Govern-
ment) to reflect the editorial reclassification of a section in the United States Code.
Finally, the amendment makes a technical and conforming change to Application
Note 2(A) to §5G1.3 (Imposition of a Sentence on a Defendant Subject to an Undis-
charged Term of Imprisonment) to reflect that subsection (c) was redesignated as sub-
section (d) by Amendment 787.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2014.
AMENDMENT 790
AMENDMENT: Section 1B1.3(a)(1)(B) is amended by striking “all reasonably foreseeable
acts and omissions of others in furtherance of the jointly undertaken criminal activity,”
and inserting the following:
“ all acts and omissions of others that were—
Amendment 790
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 89
(i) within the scope of the jointly undertaken criminal activity,
(ii) in furtherance of that criminal activity, and
(iii) reasonably foreseeable in connection with that criminal activity;”.
The Commentary to §1B1.3 captioned “Application Notes” is amended by striking
Note 2 as follows:
“2. A ‘jointly undertaken criminal activity’ is a criminal plan, scheme, endeavor,
or enterprise undertaken by the defendant in concert with others, whether or
not charged as a conspiracy.
In the case of a jointly undertaken criminal activity, subsection (a)(1)(B) pro-
vides that a defendant is accountable for the conduct (acts and omissions) of
others that was both:
(A) in furtherance of the jointly undertaken criminal activity; and
(B) reasonably foreseeable in connection with that criminal activity.
Because a count may be worded broadly and include the conduct of many par-
ticipants over a period of time, the scope of the criminal activity jointly under-
taken by the defendant (the ‘jointly undertaken criminal activity’) is not nec-
essarily the same as the scope of the entire conspiracy, and hence relevant con-
duct is not necessarily the same for every participant. In order to determine
the defendant’s accountability for the conduct of others under subsec-
tion (a)(1)(B), the court must first determine the scope of the criminal activity
the particular defendant agreed to jointly undertake (i.e., the scope of the spe-
cific conduct and objectives embraced by the defendant’s agreement). The con-
duct of others that was both in furtherance of, and reasonably foreseeable in
connection with, the criminal activity jointly undertaken by the defendant is
relevant conduct under this provision. The conduct of others that was not in
furtherance of the criminal activity jointly undertaken by the defendant, or
was not reasonably foreseeable in connection with that criminal activity, is not
relevant conduct under this provision.
In determining the scope of the criminal activity that the particular defendant
agreed to jointly undertake (i.e., the scope of the specific conduct and objectives
embraced by the defendant’s agreement), the court may consider any explicit
agreement or implicit agreement fairly inferred from the conduct of the defend-
ant and others.
Note that the criminal activity that the defendant agreed to jointly undertake,
and the reasonably foreseeable conduct of others in furtherance of that crimi-
nal activity, are not necessarily identical. For example, two defendants agree
to commit a robbery and, during the course of that robbery, the first defendant
assaults and injures a victim. The second defendant is accountable for the as-
sault and injury to the victim (even if the second defendant had not agreed to
the assault and had cautioned the first defendant to be careful not to hurt an-
yone) because the assaultive conduct was in furtherance of the jointly under-
taken criminal activity (the robbery) and was reasonably foreseeable in con-
nection with that criminal activity (given the nature of the offense).
Amendment 790
90 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
With respect to offenses involving contraband (including controlled sub-
stances), the defendant is accountable for all quantities of contraband with
which he was directly involved and, in the case of a jointly undertaken criminal
activity, all reasonably foreseeable quantities of contraband that were within
the scope of the criminal activity that he jointly undertook.
The requirement of reasonable foreseeability applies only in respect to the con-
duct (i.e., acts and omissions) of others under subsection (a)(1)(B). It does not
apply to conduct that the defendant personally undertakes, aids, abets, coun-
sels, commands, induces, procures, or willfully causes; such conduct is ad-
dressed under subsection (a)(1)(A).
A defendant’s relevant conduct does not include the conduct of members of a
conspiracy prior to the defendant joining the conspiracy, even if the defendant
knows of that conduct (e.g., in the case of a defendant who joins an ongoing
drug distribution conspiracy knowing that it had been selling two kilograms of
cocaine per week, the cocaine sold prior to the defendant joining the conspiracy
is not included as relevant conduct in determining the defendant’s offense
level). The Commission does not foreclose the possibility that there may be
some unusual set of circumstances in which the exclusion of such conduct may
not adequately reflect the defendant’s culpability; in such a case, an upward
departure may be warranted.
Illustrations of Conduct for Which the Defendant is Accountable
(a) Acts and omissions aided or abetted by the defendant
(1) Defendant A is one of ten persons hired by Defendant B to off-
load a ship containing marihuana. The off-loading of the ship
is interrupted by law enforcement officers and one ton of mari-
huana is seized (the amount on the ship as well as the amount
off-loaded). Defendant A and the other off-loaders are arrested
and convicted of importation of marihuana. Regardless of the
number of bales he personally unloaded, Defendant A is ac-
countable for the entire one-ton quantity of marihuana. De-
fendant A aided and abetted the off-loading of the entire ship-
ment of marihuana by directly participating in the off-loading
of that shipment (i.e., the specific objective of the criminal ac-
tivity he joined was the off-loading of the entire shipment).
Therefore, he is accountable for the entire shipment under sub-
section (a)(1)(A) without regard to the issue of reasonable fore-
seeability. This is conceptually similar to the case of a defend-
ant who transports a suitcase knowing that it contains a con-
trolled substance and, therefore, is accountable for the con-
trolled substance in the suitcase regardless of his knowledge or
lack of knowledge of the actual type or amount of that con-
trolled substance.
In certain cases, a defendant may be accountable for particular
conduct under more than one subsection of this guideline. As
noted in the preceding paragraph, Defendant A is accountable
for the entire one-ton shipment of marihuana under subsec-
tion (a)(1)(A). Defendant A also is accountable for the entire
Amendment 790
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 91
one-ton shipment of marihuana on the basis of subsec-
tion (a)(1)(B) (applying to a jointly undertaken criminal activ-
ity). Defendant A engaged in a jointly undertaken criminal ac-
tivity (the scope of which was the importation of the shipment
of marihuana). A finding that the one-ton quantity of mari-
huana was reasonably foreseeable is warranted from the na-
ture of the undertaking itself (the importation of marihuana by
ship typically involves very large quantities of marihuana).
The specific circumstances of the case (the defendant was one
of ten persons off-loading the marihuana in bales) also support
this finding. In an actual case, of course, if a defendant’s ac-
countability for particular conduct is established under one
provision of this guideline, it is not necessary to review alter-
native provisions under which such accountability might be es-
tablished.
(b) Acts and omissions aided or abetted by the defendant; requirement
that the conduct of others be in furtherance of the jointly undertaken
criminal activity and reasonably foreseeable
(1) Defendant C is the getaway driver in an armed bank robbery
in which $15,000 is taken and a teller is assaulted and injured.
Defendant C is accountable for the money taken under subsec-
tion (a)(1)(A) because he aided and abetted the act of taking the
money (the taking of money was the specific objective of the
offense he joined). Defendant C is accountable for the injury to
the teller under subsection (a)(1)(B) because the assault on the
teller was in furtherance of the jointly undertaken criminal ac-
tivity (the robbery) and was reasonably foreseeable in connec-
tion with that criminal activity (given the nature of the of-
fense).
As noted earlier, a defendant may be accountable for particular
conduct under more than one subsection. In this example, De-
fendant C also is accountable for the money taken on the basis
of subsection (a)(1)(B) because the taking of money was in fur-
therance of the jointly undertaken criminal activity (the rob-
bery) and was reasonably foreseeable (as noted, the taking of
money was the specific objective of the jointly undertaken crim-
inal activity).
(c) Requirement that the conduct of others be in furtherance of the jointly
undertaken criminal activity and reasonably foreseeable; scope of the
criminal activity
(1) Defendant D pays Defendant E a small amount to forge an en-
dorsement on an $800 stolen government check. Unknown to
Defendant E, Defendant D then uses that check as a down pay-
ment in a scheme to fraudulently obtain $15,000 worth of mer-
chandise. Defendant E is convicted of forging the $800 check
and is accountable for the forgery of this check under subsec-
tion (a)(1)(A). Defendant E is not accountable for the $15,000
because the fraudulent scheme to obtain $15,000 was not in
Amendment 790
92 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
furtherance of the criminal activity he jointly undertook with
Defendant D (i.e., the forgery of the $800 check).
(2) Defendants F and G, working together, design and execute a
scheme to sell fraudulent stocks by telephone. Defendant F
fraudulently obtains $20,000. Defendant G fraudulently ob-
tains $35,000. Each is convicted of mail fraud. Defendants F
and G each are accountable for the entire amount ($55,000).
Each defendant is accountable for the amount he personally
obtained under subsection (a)(1)(A). Each defendant is ac-
countable for the amount obtained by his accomplice under
subsection (a)(1)(B) because the conduct of each was in further-
ance of the jointly undertaken criminal activity and was rea-
sonably foreseeable in connection with that criminal activity.
(3) Defendants H and I engaged in an ongoing marihuana impor-
tation conspiracy in which Defendant J was hired only to help
off-load a single shipment. Defendants H, I, and J are included
in a single count charging conspiracy to import marihuana. De-
fendant J is accountable for the entire single shipment of ma-
rihuana he helped import under subsection (a)(1)(A) and any
acts and omissions in furtherance of the importation of that
shipment that were reasonably foreseeable (see the discussion
in example (a)(1) above). He is not accountable for prior or sub-
sequent shipments of marihuana imported by Defendants H
or I because those acts were not in furtherance of his jointly
undertaken criminal activity (the importation of the single
shipment of marihuana).
(4) Defendant K is a wholesale distributor of child pornography.
Defendant L is a retail-level dealer who purchases child por-
nography from Defendant K and resells it, but otherwise oper-
ates independently of Defendant K. Similarly, Defendant M is
a retail-level dealer who purchases child pornography from De-
fendant K and resells it, but otherwise operates independently
of Defendant K. Defendants L and M are aware of each other’s
criminal activity but operate independently. Defendant N is
Defendant K’s assistant who recruits customers for Defend-
ant K and frequently supervises the deliveries to Defend-
ant K’s customers. Each defendant is convicted of a count
charging conspiracy to distribute child pornography. Defend-
ant K is accountable under subsection (a)(1)(A) for the entire
quantity of child pornography sold to Defendants L and M. De-
fendant N also is accountable for the entire quantity sold to
those defendants under subsection (a)(1)(B) because the entire
quantity was within the scope of his jointly undertaken crimi-
nal activity and reasonably foreseeable. Defendant L is ac-
countable under subsection (a)(1)(A) only for the quantity of
child pornography that he purchased from Defendant K be-
cause the scope of his jointly undertaken criminal activity is
limited to that amount. For the same reason, Defendant M is
accountable under subsection (a)(1)(A) only for the quantity of
child pornography that he purchased from Defendant K.
Amendment 790
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 93
(5) Defendant O knows about her boyfriend’s ongoing drug-traf-
ficking activity, but agrees to participate on only one occasion
by making a delivery for him at his request when he was ill.
Defendant O is accountable under subsection (a)(1)(A) for the
drug quantity involved on that one occasion. Defendant O is
not accountable for the other drug sales made by her boyfriend
because those sales were not in furtherance of her jointly un-
dertaken criminal activity (i.e., the one delivery).
(6) Defendant P is a street-level drug dealer who knows of other
street-level drug dealers in the same geographic area who sell
the same type of drug as he sells. Defendant P and the other
dealers share a common source of supply, but otherwise oper-
ate independently. Defendant P is not accountable for the
quantities of drugs sold by the other street-level drug dealers
because he is not engaged in a jointly undertaken criminal ac-
tivity with them. In contrast, Defendant Q, another street-level
drug dealer, pools his resources and profits with four other
street-level drug dealers. Defendant Q is engaged in a jointly
undertaken criminal activity and, therefore, he is accountable
under subsection (a)(1)(B) for the quantities of drugs sold by
the four other dealers during the course of his joint undertak-
ing with them because those sales were in furtherance of the
jointly undertaken criminal activity and reasonably foreseea-
ble in connection with that criminal activity.
(7) Defendant R recruits Defendant S to distribute 500 grams of
cocaine. Defendant S knows that Defendant R is the prime fig-
ure in a conspiracy involved in importing much larger quanti-
ties of cocaine. As long as Defendant S’s agreement and conduct
is limited to the distribution of the 500 grams, Defendant S is
accountable only for that 500 gram amount (under subsec-
tion (a)(1)(A)), rather than the much larger quantity imported
by Defendant R.
(8) Defendants T, U, V, and W are hired by a supplier to backpack
a quantity of marihuana across the border from Mexico into the
United States. Defendants T, U, V, and W receive their indi-
vidual shipments from the supplier at the same time and coor-
dinate their importation efforts by walking across the border
together for mutual assistance and protection. Each defendant
is accountable for the aggregate quantity of marihuana trans-
ported by the four defendants. The four defendants engaged in
a jointly undertaken criminal activity, the object of which was
the importation of the four backpacks containing marihuana
(subsection (a)(1)(B)), and aided and abetted each other’s ac-
tions (subsection (a)(1)(A)) in carrying out the jointly under-
taken criminal activity. In contrast, if Defendants T, U, V,
and W were hired individually, transported their individual
shipments at different times, and otherwise operated inde-
pendently, each defendant would be accountable only for the
quantity of marihuana he personally transported (subsec-
tion (a)(1)(A)). As this example illustrates, in cases involving
contraband (including controlled substances), the scope of the
Amendment 790
94 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
jointly undertaken criminal activity (and thus the accountabil-
ity of the defendant for the contraband that was the object of
that jointly undertaken activity) may depend upon whether, in
the particular circumstances, the nature of the offense is more
appropriately viewed as one jointly undertaken criminal activ-
ity or as a number of separate criminal activities.”;
by redesignating Notes 3 through 10 as Notes 5 through 12, respectively, and inserting
the following new Notes 2, 3, and 4:
“2. Accountability Under More Than One Provision.—In certain cases, a defend-
ant may be accountable for particular conduct under more than one subsection
of this guideline. If a defendant’s accountability for particular conduct is estab-
lished under one provision of this guideline, it is not necessary to review alter-
native provisions under which such accountability might be established.
3. Jointly Undertaken Criminal Activity (Subsection (a)(1)(B)).—
(A) In General.—A ‘jointly undertaken criminal activity’ is a criminal plan,
scheme, endeavor, or enterprise undertaken by the defendant in con-
cert with others, whether or not charged as a conspiracy.
In the case of a jointly undertaken criminal activity, subsec-
tion (a)(1)(B) provides that a defendant is accountable for the conduct
(acts and omissions) of others that was:
(i) within the scope of the jointly undertaken criminal activity;
(ii) in furtherance of that criminal activity; and
(iii) reasonably foreseeable in connection with that criminal activ-
ity.
The conduct of others that meets all three criteria set forth in subdivi-
sions (i) through (iii) (i.e., ‘within the scope,’ ‘in furtherance,’ and ‘rea-
sonably foreseeable’) is relevant conduct under this provision. How-
ever, when the conduct of others does not meet any one of the criteria
set forth in subdivisions (i) through (iii), the conduct is not relevant
conduct under this provision.
(B) Scope.—Because a count may be worded broadly and include the con-
duct of many participants over a period of time, the scope of the ‘jointly
undertaken criminal activity’ is not necessarily the same as the scope
of the entire conspiracy, and hence relevant conduct is not necessarily
the same for every participant. In order to determine the defendant’s
accountability for the conduct of others under subsection (a)(1)(B), the
court must first determine the scope of the criminal activity the partic-
ular defendant agreed to jointly undertake (i.e., the scope of the specific
conduct and objectives embraced by the defendant’s agreement). In do-
ing so, the court may consider any explicit agreement or implicit agree-
ment fairly inferred from the conduct of the defendant and others. Ac-
cordingly, the accountability of the defendant for the acts of others is
limited by the scope of his or her agreement to jointly undertake the
particular criminal activity. Acts of others that were not within the
Amendment 790
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 95
scope of the defendant’s agreement, even if those acts were known or
reasonably foreseeable to the defendant, are not relevant conduct un-
der subsection (a)(1)(B).
In cases involving contraband (including controlled substances), the
scope of the jointly undertaken criminal activity (and thus the account-
ability of the defendant for the contraband that was the object of that
jointly undertaken activity) may depend upon whether, in the particu-
lar circumstances, the nature of the offense is more appropriately
viewed as one jointly undertaken criminal activity or as a number of
separate criminal activities.
A defendant’s relevant conduct does not include the conduct of mem-
bers of a conspiracy prior to the defendant joining the conspiracy, even
if the defendant knows of that conduct (e.g., in the case of a defendant
who joins an ongoing drug distribution conspiracy knowing that it had
been selling two kilograms of cocaine per week, the cocaine sold prior
to the defendant joining the conspiracy is not included as relevant con-
duct in determining the defendant’s offense level). The Commission
does not foreclose the possibility that there may be some unusual set
of circumstances in which the exclusion of such conduct may not ade-
quately reflect the defendant’s culpability; in such a case, an upward
departure may be warranted.
(C) In Furtherance.—The court must determine if the conduct (acts and
omissions) of others was in furtherance of the jointly undertaken crim-
inal activity.
(D) Reasonably Foreseeable.—The court must then determine if the con-
duct (acts and omissions) of others that was within the scope of, and in
furtherance of, the jointly undertaken criminal activity was reasonably
foreseeable in connection with that criminal activity.
Note that the criminal activity that the defendant agreed to jointly un-
dertake, and the reasonably foreseeable conduct of others in further-
ance of that criminal activity, are not necessarily identical. For exam-
ple, two defendants agree to commit a robbery and, during the course
of that robbery, the first defendant assaults and injures a victim. The
second defendant is accountable for the assault and injury to the victim
(even if the second defendant had not agreed to the assault and had
cautioned the first defendant to be careful not to hurt anyone) because
the assaultive conduct was within the scope of the jointly undertaken
criminal activity (the robbery), was in furtherance of that criminal ac-
tivity (the robbery), and was reasonably foreseeable in connection with
that criminal activity (given the nature of the offense).
With respect to offenses involving contraband (including controlled
substances), the defendant is accountable under subsection (a)(1)(A)
for all quantities of contraband with which he was directly involved
and, in the case of a jointly undertaken criminal activity under subsec-
tion (a)(1)(B), all quantities of contraband that were involved in trans-
actions carried out by other participants, if those transactions were
Amendment 790
96 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
within the scope of, and in furtherance of, the jointly undertaken crim-
inal activity and were reasonably foreseeable in connection with that
criminal activity.
The requirement of reasonable foreseeability applies only in respect to
the conduct (i.e., acts and omissions) of others under subsec-
tion (a)(1)(B). It does not apply to conduct that the defendant person-
ally undertakes, aids, abets, counsels, commands, induces, procures, or
willfully causes; such conduct is addressed under subsection (a)(1)(A).
4. Illustrations of Conduct for Which the Defendant is Accountable under Sub-
sections (a)(1)(A) and (B).—
(A) Acts and omissions aided or abetted by the defendant.—
(i) Defendant A is one of ten persons hired by Defendant B to off-
load a ship containing marihuana. The off-loading of the ship
is interrupted by law enforcement officers and one ton of mari-
huana is seized (the amount on the ship as well as the amount
off-loaded). Defendant A and the other off-loaders are arrested
and convicted of importation of marihuana. Regardless of the
number of bales he personally unloaded, Defendant A is ac-
countable for the entire one-ton quantity of marihuana. De-
fendant A aided and abetted the off-loading of the entire ship-
ment of marihuana by directly participating in the off-loading
of that shipment (i.e., the specific objective of the criminal ac-
tivity he joined was the off-loading of the entire shipment).
Therefore, he is accountable for the entire shipment under sub-
section (a)(1)(A) without regard to the issue of reasonable fore-
seeability. This is conceptually similar to the case of a defend-
ant who transports a suitcase knowing that it contains a con-
trolled substance and, therefore, is accountable for the con-
trolled substance in the suitcase regardless of his knowledge or
lack of knowledge of the actual type or amount of that con-
trolled substance.
In certain cases, a defendant may be accountable for particular
conduct under more than one subsection of this guideline. As
noted in the preceding paragraph, Defendant A is accountable
for the entire one-ton shipment of marihuana under subsec-
tion (a)(1)(A). Defendant A also is accountable for the entire
one-ton shipment of marihuana on the basis of subsec-
tion (a)(1)(B) (applying to a jointly undertaken criminal activ-
ity). Defendant A engaged in a jointly undertaken criminal ac-
tivity and all three criteria of subsection (a)(1)(B) are met.
First, the conduct was within the scope of the criminal activity
(the importation of the shipment of marihuana). Second, the
off-loading of the shipment of marihuana was in furtherance of
the criminal activity, as described above. And third, a finding
that the one-ton quantity of marihuana was reasonably fore-
seeable is warranted from the nature of the undertaking itself
(the importation of marihuana by ship typically involves very
large quantities of marihuana). The specific circumstances of
the case (the defendant was one of ten persons off-loading the
Amendment 790
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 97
marihuana in bales) also support this finding. In an actual
case, of course, if a defendant’s accountability for particular
conduct is established under one provision of this guideline, it
is not necessary to review alternative provisions under which
such accountability might be established. See Application
Note 2.
(B) Acts and omissions aided or abetted by the defendant; acts and omis-
sions in a jointly undertaken criminal activity.—
(i) Defendant C is the getaway driver in an armed bank robbery
in which $15,000 is taken and a teller is assaulted and injured.
Defendant C is accountable for the money taken under subsec-
tion (a)(1)(A) because he aided and abetted the act of taking the
money (the taking of money was the specific objective of the
offense he joined). Defendant C is accountable for the injury to
the teller under subsection (a)(1)(B) because the assault on the
teller was within the scope and in furtherance of the jointly
undertaken criminal activity (the robbery), and was reasonably
foreseeable in connection with that criminal activity (given the
nature of the offense).
As noted earlier, a defendant may be accountable for particular
conduct under more than one subsection. In this example, De-
fendant C also is accountable for the money taken on the basis
of subsection (a)(1)(B) because the taking of money was within
the scope and in furtherance of the jointly undertaken criminal
activity (the robbery), and was reasonably foreseeable (as
noted, the taking of money was the specific objective of the
jointly undertaken criminal activity).
(C) Requirements that the conduct of others be within the scope of the
jointly undertaken criminal activity, in furtherance of that criminal ac-
tivity, and reasonably foreseeable.—
(i) Defendant D pays Defendant E a small amount to forge an en-
dorsement on an $800 stolen government check. Unknown to
Defendant E, Defendant D then uses that check as a down pay-
ment in a scheme to fraudulently obtain $15,000 worth of mer-
chandise. Defendant E is convicted of forging the $800 check
and is accountable for the forgery of this check under subsec-
tion (a)(1)(A). Defendant E is not accountable for the $15,000
because the fraudulent scheme to obtain $15,000 was not
within the scope of the jointly undertaken criminal activity
(i.e., the forgery of the $800 check).
(ii) Defendants F and G, working together, design and execute a
scheme to sell fraudulent stocks by telephone. Defendant F
fraudulently obtains $20,000. Defendant G fraudulently ob-
tains $35,000. Each is convicted of mail fraud. Defendants F
and G each are accountable for the entire amount ($55,000).
Each defendant is accountable for the amount he personally
obtained under subsection (a)(1)(A). Each defendant is ac-
countable for the amount obtained by his accomplice under
Amendment 790
98 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
subsection (a)(1)(B) because the conduct of each was within the
scope of the jointly undertaken criminal activity (the scheme to
sell fraudulent stocks), was in furtherance of that criminal ac-
tivity, and was reasonably foreseeable in connection with that
criminal activity.
(iii) Defendants H and I engaged in an ongoing marihuana impor-
tation conspiracy in which Defendant J was hired only to help
off-load a single shipment. Defendants H, I, and J are included
in a single count charging conspiracy to import marihuana. De-
fendant J is accountable for the entire single shipment of ma-
rihuana he helped import under subsection (a)(1)(A) and any
acts and omissions of others related to the importation of that
shipment on the basis of subsection (a)(1)(B) (see the discussion
in example (A)(i) above). He is not accountable for prior or sub-
sequent shipments of marihuana imported by Defendants H
or I because those acts were not within the scope of his jointly
undertaken criminal activity (the importation of the single
shipment of marihuana).
(iv) Defendant K is a wholesale distributor of child pornography.
Defendant L is a retail-level dealer who purchases child por-
nography from Defendant K and resells it, but otherwise oper-
ates independently of Defendant K. Similarly, Defendant M is
a retail-level dealer who purchases child pornography from De-
fendant K and resells it, but otherwise operates independently
of Defendant K. Defendants L and M are aware of each other’s
criminal activity but operate independently. Defendant N is
Defendant K’s assistant who recruits customers for Defend-
ant K and frequently supervises the deliveries to Defend-
ant K’s customers. Each defendant is convicted of a count
charging conspiracy to distribute child pornography. Defend-
ant K is accountable under subsection (a)(1)(A) for the entire
quantity of child pornography sold to Defendants L and M. De-
fendant N also is accountable for the entire quantity sold to
those defendants under subsection (a)(1)(B) because the entire
quantity was within the scope of his jointly undertaken crimi-
nal activity (to distribute child pornography with Defend-
ant K), in furtherance of that criminal activity, and reasonably
foreseeable. Defendant L is accountable under subsec-
tion (a)(1)(A) only for the quantity of child pornography that he
purchased from Defendant K because he is not engaged in a
jointly undertaken criminal activity with the other defendants.
For the same reason, Defendant M is accountable under sub-
section (a)(1)(A) only for the quantity of child pornography that
he purchased from Defendant K.
(v) Defendant O knows about her boyfriend’s ongoing drug-traf-
ficking activity, but agrees to participate on only one occasion
by making a delivery for him at his request when he was ill.
Defendant O is accountable under subsection (a)(1)(A) for the
drug quantity involved on that one occasion. Defendant O is
not accountable for the other drug sales made by her boyfriend
Amendment 790
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 99
because those sales were not within the scope of her jointly un-
dertaken criminal activity (i.e., the one delivery).
(vi) Defendant P is a street-level drug dealer who knows of other
street-level drug dealers in the same geographic area who sell
the same type of drug as he sells. Defendant P and the other
dealers share a common source of supply, but otherwise oper-
ate independently. Defendant P is not accountable for the
quantities of drugs sold by the other street-level drug dealers
because he is not engaged in a jointly undertaken criminal ac-
tivity with them. In contrast, Defendant Q, another street-level
drug dealer, pools his resources and profits with four other
street-level drug dealers. Defendant Q is engaged in a jointly
undertaken criminal activity and, therefore, he is accountable
under subsection (a)(1)(B) for the quantities of drugs sold by
the four other dealers during the course of his joint undertak-
ing with them because those sales were within the scope of the
jointly undertaken criminal activity, in furtherance of that
criminal activity, and reasonably foreseeable in connection
with that criminal activity.
(vii) Defendant R recruits Defendant S to distribute 500 grams of
cocaine. Defendant S knows that Defendant R is the prime fig-
ure in a conspiracy involved in importing much larger quanti-
ties of cocaine. As long as Defendant S’s agreement and conduct
is limited to the distribution of the 500 grams, Defendant S is
accountable only for that 500 gram amount (under subsec-
tion (a)(1)(A)), rather than the much larger quantity imported
by Defendant R. Defendant S is not accountable under subsec-
tion (a)(1)(B) for the other quantities imported by Defendant R
because those quantities were not within the scope of his jointly
undertaken criminal activity (i.e., the 500 grams).
(viii) Defendants T, U, V, and W are hired by a supplier to backpack
a quantity of marihuana across the border from Mexico into the
United States. Defendants T, U, V, and W receive their indi-
vidual shipments from the supplier at the same time and coor-
dinate their importation efforts by walking across the border
together for mutual assistance and protection. Each defendant
is accountable for the aggregate quantity of marihuana trans-
ported by the four defendants. The four defendants engaged in
a jointly undertaken criminal activity, the object of which was
the importation of the four backpacks containing marihuana
(subsection (a)(1)(B)), and aided and abetted each other’s ac-
tions (subsection (a)(1)(A)) in carrying out the jointly under-
taken criminal activity (which under subsection (a)(1)(B) were
also in furtherance of, and reasonably foreseeable in connection
with, the criminal activity). In contrast, if Defendants T, U, V,
and W were hired individually, transported their individual
shipments at different times, and otherwise operated inde-
pendently, each defendant would be accountable only for the
quantity of marihuana he personally transported (subsec-
tion (a)(1)(A)). As this example illustrates, the scope of the
jointly undertaken criminal activity may depend upon
Amendment 791
100 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
whether, in the particular circumstances, the nature of the of-
fense is more appropriately viewed as one jointly undertaken
criminal activity or as a number of separate criminal activities.
See Application Note 3(B).”.
The Commentary to §2K2.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 14(E)
by striking “Application Note 9” both places such term appears and inserting “Appli-
cation Note 11”.
The Commentary to §2X3.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking “Application Note 10” and inserting “Application Note 12”.
The Commentary to §2X4.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking “Application Note 10” and inserting “Application Note 12”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment is a result of the Commission’s effort to
clarify the use of relevant conduct in offenses involving multiple participants.
The amendment makes clarifying revisions to §1B1.3 (Relevant Conduct (Factors that
Determine the Guideline Range)). It restructures the guideline and its commentary to
set out more clearly the three-step analysis the court applies in determining whether
a defendant is accountable for the conduct of others in a jointly undertaken criminal
activity under §1B1.3(a)(1)(B). The three-step analysis requires that the court (1) iden-
tify the scope of the jointly undertaken criminal activity; (2) determine whether the
conduct of others in the jointly undertaken criminal activity was in furtherance of that
criminal activity; and (3) determine whether the conduct of others was reasonably fore-
seeable in connection with that criminal activity.
Prior to this amendment, the “scope” element of the three-step analysis was identified
in the commentary to §1B1.3 but was not included in the text of the guideline itself.
This amendment makes clear that, under the “jointly undertaken criminal activity”
provision, a defendant is accountable for the conduct of others in a jointly undertaken
criminal activity if the conduct meets all three criteria of the three-step analysis. This
amendment is not intended as a substantive change in policy.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2015.
AMENDMENT 791
AMENDMENT: Section 2B1.1(b) is amended by striking paragraph (1) as follows:
“(1) If the loss exceeded $5,000, increase the offense level as follows:
Loss (Apply the Greatest) Increase in Level
(A) $5,000 or less no increase
(B) More than $5,000 add 2
(C) More than $10,000 add 4
(D) More than $30,000 add 6
(E) More than $70,000 add 8
(F) More than $120,000 add 10
(G) More than $200,000 add 12
Amendment 791
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 101
(H) More than $400,000 add 14
(I) More than $1,000,000 add 16
(J) More than $2,500,000 add 18
(K) More than $7,000,000 add 20
(L) More than $20,000,000 add 22
(M) More than $50,000,000 add 24
(N) More than $100,000,000 add 26
(O) More than $200,000,000 add 28
(P) More than $400,000,000 add 30.”;
and inserting the following:
“(1) If the loss exceeded $6,500, increase the offense level as follows:
Loss (Apply the Greatest) Increase in Level
(A) $6,500 or less no increase
(B) More than $6,500 add 2
(C) More than $15,000 add 4
(D) More than $40,000 add 6
(E) More than $95,000 add 8
(F) More than $150,000 add 10
(G) More than $250,000 add 12
(H) More than $550,000 add 14
(I) More than $1,500,000 add 16
(J) More than $3,500,000 add 18
(K) More than $9,500,000 add 20
(L) More than $25,000,000 add 22
(M) More than $65,000,000 add 24
(N) More than $150,000,000 add 26
(O) More than $250,000,000 add 28
(P) More than $550,000,000 add 30.”.
Section 2B1.4(b)(1) is amended by striking “$5,000” and inserting “$6,500”.
Section 2B1.5(b)(1) is amended by striking “$2,000” and inserting “$2,500”; and by
striking “$5,000” both places such term appears and inserting “$6,500”.
Section 2B2.1(b) is amended by striking paragraph (2) as follows:
“(2) If the loss exceeded $2,500, increase the offense level as follows:
Loss (Apply the Greatest) Increase in Level
(A) $2,500 or less no increase
(B) More than $2,500 add 1
(C) More than $10,000 add 2
(D) More than $50,000 add 3
(E) More than $250,000 add 4
(F) More than $800,000 add 5
(G) More than $1,500,000 add 6
(H) More than $2,500,000 add 7
(I) More than $5,000,000 add 8.”;
Amendment 791
102 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
and inserting the following:
“(2) If the loss exceeded $5,000, increase the offense level as follows:
Loss (Apply the Greatest) Increase in Level
(A) $5,000 or less no increase
(B) More than $5,000 add 1
(C) More than $20,000 add 2
(D) More than $95,000 add 3
(E) More than $500,000 add 4
(F) More than $1,500,000 add 5
(G) More than $3,000,000 add 6
(H) More than $5,000,000 add 7
(I) More than $9,500,000 add 8.”.
Section 2B2.3(b)(3) is amended by striking “$2,000” and inserting “$2,500”; and by
striking “$5,000” both places such term appears and inserting “$6,500”.
Section 2B3.1(b) is amended by striking paragraph (7) as follows:
“(7) If the loss exceeded $10,000, increase the offense level as follows:
Loss (Apply the Greatest) Increase in Level
(A) $10,000 or less no increase
(B) More than $10,000 add 1
(C) More than $50,000 add 2
(D) More than $250,000 add 3
(E) More than $800,000 add 4
(F) More than $1,500,000 add 5
(G) More than $2,500,000 add 6
(H) More than $5,000,000 add 7.”;
and inserting the following:
“(7) If the loss exceeded $20,000, increase the offense level as follows:
Loss (Apply the Greatest) Increase in Level
(A) $20,000 or less no increase
(B) More than $20,000 add 1
(C) More than $95,000 add 2
(D) More than $500,000 add 3
(E) More than $1,500,000 add 4
(F) More than $3,000,000 add 5
(G) More than $5,000,000 add 6
(H) More than $9,500,000 add 7.”.
Section 2B3.2(b)(2) is amended by striking “$10,000” and inserting “$20,000”.
Sections 2B3.3(b)(1), 2B4.1(b)(1), 2B5.1(b)(1), 2B5.3(b)(1), and 2B6.1(b)(1) are each
amended by striking “$2,000” and inserting “$2,500”; and by striking “$5,000” both
places such term appears and inserting “$6,500”.
Amendment 791
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 103
Sections 2C1.1(b)(2), 2C1.2(b)(2), and 2C1.8(b)(1) are each amended by striking
“$5,000” and inserting “$6,500”.
Sections 2E5.1(b)(2) and 2Q2.1(b)(3) are each amended by striking “$2,000” and insert-
ing “$2,500”; and by striking “$5,000” both places such term appears and inserting
“$6,500”.
Section 2R1.1(b) is amended by striking paragraph (2) as follows:
“(2) If the volume of commerce attributable to the defendant was more than
$1,000,000, adjust the offense level as follows:
Volume of Adjustment to
Commerce (Apply the Greatest) Offense Level
(A) More than $1,000,000 add 2
(B) More than $10,000,000 add 4
(C) More than $40,000,000 add 6
(D) More than $100,000,000 add 8
(E) More than $250,000,000 add 10
(F) More than $500,000,000 add 12
(G) More than $1,000,000,000 add 14
(H) More than $1,500,000,000 add 16.”;
and inserting the following:
“(2) If the volume of commerce attributable to the defendant was more than
$1,000,000, adjust the offense level as follows:
Volume of Adjustment to
Commerce (Apply the Greatest) Offense Level
(A) More than $1,000,000 add 2
(B) More than $10,000,000 add 4
(C) More than $50,000,000 add 6
(D) More than $100,000,000 add 8
(E) More than $300,000,000 add 10
(F) More than $600,000,000 add 12
(G) More than $1,200,000,000 add 14
(H) More than $1,850,000,000 add 16.”.
Section 2T3.1(a) is amended by striking “$1,000” both places such term appears and
inserting “$1,500”; and by striking “$100” both places such term appears and inserting
“$200”.
Section 2T4.1 is amended by striking the following:
“ Tax Loss (Apply the Greatest) Offense Level
(A) $2,000 or less 6
(B) More than $2,000 8
(C) More than $5,000 10
(D) More than $12,500 12
Amendment 791
104 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
(E) More than $30,000 14
(F) More than $80,000 16
(G) More than $200,000 18
(H) More than $400,000 20
(I) More than $1,000,000 22
(J) More than $2,500,000 24
(K) More than $7,000,000 26
(L) More than $20,000,000 28
(M) More than $50,000,000 30
(N) More than $100,000,000 32
(O) More than $200,000,000 34
(P) More than $400,000,000 36.”;
and inserting the following:
“ Tax Loss (Apply the Greatest) Offense Level
(A) $2,500 or less 6
(B) More than $2,500 8
(C) More than $6,500 10
(D) More than $15,000 12
(E) More than $40,000 14
(F) More than $100,000 16
(G) More than $250,000 18
(H) More than $550,000 20
(I) More than $1,500,000 22
(J) More than $3,500,000 24
(K) More than $9,500,000 26
(L) More than $25,000,000 28
(M) More than $65,000,000 30
(N) More than $150,000,000 32
(O) More than $250,000,000 34
(P) More than $550,000,000 36.”;
Section 5E1.2 is amended in subsection (c)(3) by striking the following:
“ Fine Table
Offense A B
Level Minimum Maximum
3 and below $100 $5,000
4–5 $250 $5,000
6–7 $500 $5,000
8–9 $1,000 $10,000
10–11 $2,000 $20,000
12–13 $3,000 $30,000
14–15 $4,000 $40,000
16–17 $5,000 $50,000
18–19 $6,000 $60,000
20–22 $7,500 $75,000
23–25 $10,000 $100,000
26–28 $12,500 $125,000
29–31 $15,000 $150,000
Amendment 791
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 105
32–34 $17,500 $175,000
35–37 $20,000 $200,000
38 and above $25,000 $250,000.”,
and inserting the following:
“ Fine Table
Offense A B
Level Minimum Maximum
3 and below $200 $9,500
4–5 $500 $9,500
6–7 $1,000 $9,500
8–9 $2,000 $20,000
10–11 $4,000 $40,000
12–13 $5,500 $55,000
14–15 $7,500 $75,000
16–17 $10,000 $95,000
18–19 $10,000 $100,000
20–22 $15,000 $150,000
23–25 $20,000 $200,000
26–28 $25,000 $250,000
29–31 $30,000 $300,000
32–34 $35,000 $350,000
35–37 $40,000 $400,000
38 and above $50,000 $500,000.”;
in subsection (c)(4) by striking “$250,000” and inserting “$500,000”;
and by inserting after subsection (g) the following new subsection (h):
“(h) Special Instruction
(1) For offenses committed prior to November 1, 2015, use the applicable
fine guideline range that was set forth in the version of §5E1.2(c) that
was in effect on November 1, 2014, rather than the applicable fine
guideline range set forth in subsection (c) above.”.
Section 8C2.4 is amended in subsection (d) by striking the following:
“ Offense Level Fine Table
Offense Level Amount
6 or less $5,000
7 $7,500
8 $10,000
9 $15,000
10 $20,000
11 $30,000
12 $40,000
13 $60,000
14 $85,000
Amendment 791
106 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
15 $125,000
16 $175,000
17 $250,000
18 $350,000
19 $500,000
20 $650,000
21 $910,000
22 $1,200,000
23 $1,600,000
24 $2,100,000
25 $2,800,000
26 $3,700,000
27 $4,800,000
28 $6,300,000
29 $8,100,000
30 $10,500,000
31 $13,500,000
32 $17,500,000
33 $22,000,000
34 $28,500,000
35 $36,000,000
36 $45,500,000
37 $57,500,000
38 or more $72,500,000.”,
and inserting the following:
“ Offense Level Fine Table
Offense Level Amount
6 or less $8,500
7 $15,000
8 $15,000
9 $25,000
10 $35,000
11 $50,000
12 $70,000
13 $100,000
14 $150,000
15 $200,000
16 $300,000
17 $450,000
18 $600,000
19 $850,000
20 $1,000,000
21 $1,500,000
22 $2,000,000
23 $3,000,000
24 $3,500,000
25 $5,000,000
26 $6,500,000
27 $8,500,000
28 $10,000,000
Amendment 791
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 107
29 $15,000,000
30 $20,000,000
31 $25,000,000
32 $30,000,000
33 $40,000,000
34 $50,000,000
35 $65,000,000
36 $80,000,000
37 $100,000,000
38 or more $150,000,000.”;
and by inserting after subsection (d) the following new subsection (e):
“(e) Special Instruction
(1) For offenses committed prior to November 1, 2015, use the offense level
fine table that was set forth in the version of §8C2.4(d) that was in
effect on November 1, 2014, rather than the offense level fine table set
forth in subsection (d) above.”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment makes adjustments to the monetary tables
in §§2B1.1 (Theft, Property, Destruction, and Fraud), 2B2.1 (Burglary), 2B3.1 (Rob-
bery), 2R1.1 (Bid-Rigging, Price-Fixing or Market-Allocation Agreements Among Com-
petitors), 2T4.1 (Tax Table), 5E1.2 (Fines for Individual Defendants), and 8C2.4 (Base
Fine) to account for inflation. The amendment adjusts the amounts in each of the seven
monetary tables using a specific multiplier derived from the Consumer Price In-
dex (CPI), and then rounds—
 amounts greater than $100,000,000 to the nearest multiple of $50,000,000;
 amounts greater than $10,000,000 to the nearest multiple of $5,000,000;
 amounts greater than $1,000,000 to the nearest multiple of $500,000;
 amounts greater than $100,000 to the nearest multiple of $50,000;
 amounts greater than $10,000 to the nearest multiple of $5,000;
 amounts greater than $1,000 to the nearest multiple of $500; and
 amounts of $1,000 or less to the nearest multiple of $50.
In addition, the amendment includes conforming changes to other Chapter Two guide-
lines that refer to the monetary tables.
Congress has generally mandated that agencies in the executive branch adjust the civil
monetary penalties they impose to account for inflation using the CPI. See 28 U.S.C.
§ 2461 note (Federal Civil Penalties Inflationary Adjustment Act of 1990). Although
the Commission’s work does not involve civil monetary penalties, it does establish ap-
propriate criminal sentences for categories of offenses and offenders, including appro-
priate amounts for criminal fines. While some of the monetary values in the Chapter
Two guidelines have been revised since they were originally established in 1987, none
of the tables has been specifically revised to account for inflation.
Due to inflationary changes, there has been a gradual decrease in the value of the
dollar over time. As a result, monetary losses in current offenses reflect, to some de-
gree, a lower degree of harm and culpability than did equivalent amounts when the
monetary tables were established or last substantively amended. Similarly, the fine
levels recommended by the guidelines are lower in value than when they were last
Amendment 792
108 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
adjusted, and therefore, do not have the same sentencing impact as a similar fine in
the past. Based on its analysis and widespread support for inflationary adjustments
expressed in public comment, the Commission concluded that aligning the above mon-
etary tables with modern dollar values is an appropriate step at this time.
The amendment adjusts each table based on inflationary changes since the year each
monetary table was last substantially amended:
 Loss table in §2B1.1 and tax table in §2T4.1: adjusting for inflation from 2001
($1.00 in 2001 = $1.34 in 2014);
 Loss tables in §§2B2.1 and 2B3.1 and fine table for individual defendants at
§5E1.2(c)(3): adjusting for inflation from 1989 ($1.00 in 1989 = $1.91 in 2014);
 Volume of Commerce table in §2R1.1: adjusting for inflation from 2005 ($1.00
in 2005 = $1.22 in 2014); and
 Fine table for organizational defendants at §8C2.4(d): adjusting for inflation
from 1991 ($1.00 in 1991 = $1.74 in 2014).
Adjusting from the last substantive amendment year appropriately accounts for the
Commission’s previous work in revising these tables at various times. Although not
specifically focused on inflationary issues, previous Commissions engaged in careful
examination (and at times, a wholesale rewriting) of the monetary tables and ulti-
mately included monetary and enhancement levels that it considered appropriate at
that time. The Commission estimates that this amendment would result in the Bureau
of Prisons having approximately 224 additional prison beds available at the end of the
first year after implementation, and approximately 956 additional prison beds availa-
ble at the end of its fifth year of implementation.
Finally, the amendment adds a special instruction to both §§5E1.2 and 8C2.4 providing
that, for offenses committed prior to November 1, 2015, the court shall use the fine
provisions that were in effect on November 1, 2014, rather than the fine provisions as
amended for inflation. This addition responds to concerns expressed in public comment
that changes to the fine tables might create ex post facto problems. It ensures that an
offender whose offense level is calculated under the current Guidelines Manual is not
subject to the inflated fine provisions if his or her offense was committed prior to No-
vember 1, 2015. Such guidance is similar to that provided in the commentary to §5E1.3
(Special Assessment) relating to the amount of the special assessment to be imposed
in a given case.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2015.
AMENDMENT 792
AMENDMENT: Section 2B1.1 is amended in subsection (b)(2) by striking the following:
“ (Apply the greatest) If the offense—
(A) (i) involved 10 or more victims; or (ii) was committed through mass-
marketing, increase by 2 levels;
Amendment 792
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 109
(B) involved 50 or more victims, increase by 4 levels; or
(C) involved 250 or more victims, increase by 6 levels.”,
and inserting the following:
“ (Apply the greatest) If the offense—
(A) (i) involved 10 or more victims; (ii) was committed through mass-mar-
keting; or (iii) resulted in substantial financial hardship to one or more
victims, increase by 2 levels;
(B) resulted in substantial financial hardship to five or more victims, in-
crease by 4 levels; or
(C) resulted in substantial financial hardship to 25 or more victims, in-
crease by 6 levels.”;
in subsection (b)(10)(C) by inserting after “the offense otherwise involved sophisticated
means” the following: “and the defendant intentionally engaged in or caused the con-
duct constituting sophisticated means”;
and in subsection (b)(16)(B) by inserting “or” at the end of subdivision (i), and by strik-
ing “; or (iii) substantially endangered the solvency or financial security of 100 or more
victims”.
The Commentary to §2B1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 3(A)(ii)
by striking “(I) means the pecuniary harm that was intended to result from the offense;
and” and inserting “(I) means the pecuniary harm that the defendant purposely sought
to inflict; and”;
in Note 3(F)(ix) by striking “there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the actual
loss attributable to the change in value of the security or commodity is the amount
determined by—” and inserting “the court in determining loss may use any method
that is appropriate and practicable under the circumstances. One such method the
court may consider is a method under which the actual loss attributable to the change
in value of the security or commodity is the amount determined by—”;
in Note 4 by striking “50 victims” and inserting “10 victims” at subdivision (C)(ii); and
by inserting at the end the following new subdivision (F):
“(F) Substantial Financial Hardship.—In determining whether the offense resulted
in substantial financial hardship to a victim, the court shall consider, among
other factors, whether the offense resulted in the victim—
(i) becoming insolvent;
(ii) filing for bankruptcy under the Bankruptcy Code (title 11, United
States Code);
(iii) suffering substantial loss of a retirement, education, or other savings
or investment fund;
Amendment 792
110 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
(iv) making substantial changes to his or her employment, such as post-
poning his or her retirement plans;
(v) making substantial changes to his or her living arrangements, such as
relocating to a less expensive home; and
(vi) suffering substantial harm to his or her ability to obtain credit.”;
in Note 9 by striking “Sophisticated Means Enhancement under” in the heading and
inserting “Application of”; and by inserting at the end of the heading of subdivision (B)
the following: “under Subsection (b)(10)(C)”;
and in Note 20(A)(vi) by striking both “or credit record” and “or a damaged credit rec-
ord”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment makes several changes to the guideline
applicable to economic crimes, §2B1.1 (Theft, Property Destruction, and Fraud), to bet-
ter account for harm to victims, individual culpability, and the offender’s intent. This
amendment is a result of the Commission’s multi-year study of §2B1.1 and related
guidelines, and follows extensive data collection and analysis relating to economic of-
fenses and offenders. Using this Commission data, combined with legal analysis and
public comment, the Commission identified a number of specific areas where changes
were appropriate.
Victims Table
First, the amendment revises the victims table in §2B1.1(b)(2) to specifically incorpo-
rate substantial financial hardship to victims as a factor in sentencing economic crime
offenders. As amended, the first tier of the victims table provides for a 2-level enhance-
ment where the offense involved 10 or more victims or mass-marketing, or if the of-
fense resulted in substantial financial hardship to one or more victims. The 4-level
enhancement applies if the offense resulted in substantial financial hardship to five or
more victims, and the 6-level enhancement applies if the offense resulted in substan-
tial financial hardship to 25 or more victims. As a conforming change, the special rule
in Application Note 4(C)(ii)(I), pertaining to theft of undelivered mail, is also revised
to refer to 10 rather than 50 victims.
In addition, the amendment adds a non-exhaustive list of factors for courts to consider
in determining whether the offense caused substantial financial hardship. These fac-
tors include: becoming insolvent; filing for bankruptcy; suffering substantial loss of a
retirement, education, or other savings or investment fund; making substantial
changes to employment; making substantial changes to living arrangements; or suf-
fering substantial harm to the victim’s ability to obtain credit. Two conforming changes
are also included. First, one factor — substantial harm to ability to obtain credit —
was previously included in Application Note 20(A)(vi) as a potential departure consid-
eration. The amendment removes this language from the Application Note. Second,
the amendment deletes subsection (b)(16)(B)(iii), which provided for an enhancement
where an offense substantially endangered the solvency or financial security of 100 or
more victims.
The Commission continues to believe that the number of victims is a meaningful meas-
ure of the harm and scope of an offense and can be indicative of its seriousness. It is
for this reason that the amended victims table maintains the 2-level enhancement for
offenses that involve 10 or more victims or mass marketing. However, the revisions to
Amendment 792
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 111
the victims table also reflect the Commission’s conclusion that the guideline should
place greater emphasis on the extent of harm that particular victims suffer as a result
of the offense. Consistent with the Commission’s overall goal of focusing more on victim
harm, the revised victims table ensures that an offense that results in even one victim
suffering substantial financial harm receives increased punishment, while also lessen-
ing the cumulative impact of loss and the number of victims, particularly in high-loss
cases.
Intended Loss
Second, the amendment revises the commentary at §2B1.1, Application Note 3(A)(ii),
which has defined intended loss as “pecuniary harm that was intended to result from
the offense.” In interpreting this provision, courts have expressed some disagreement
as to whether a subjective or an objective inquiry is required. Compare United States
v. Manatau, 647 F.3d 1048 (10th Cir. 2011) (holding that a subjective inquiry is re-
quired), United States v. Diallo, 710 F.3d 147, 151 (3d Cir. 2013) (“To make this deter-
mination, we look to the defendant’s subjective expectation, not to the risk of loss to
which he may have exposed his victims.”), United States v. Confredo, 528 F.3d 143,
152 (2d Cir. 2008) (remanding for consideration of whether defendant had “proven a
subjective intent to cause a loss of less than the aggregate amount” of fraudulent
loans), and United States v. Sanders, 343 F.3d 511, 527 (5th Cir. 2003) (“our case law
requires the government prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant
had the subjective intent to cause the loss that is used to calculate his offense level”),
with United States v. Innarelli, 524 F.3d 286, 291 (1st Cir. 2008) (“we focus our loss
inquiry for purposes of determining a defendant’s offense level on the objectively rea-
sonable expectation of a person in his position at the time he perpetrated the fraud,
not on his subjective intentions or hopes”) and United States v. Lane, 323 F.3d 568,
590 (7th Cir. 2003) (“The determination of intended loss under the Sentencing Guide-
lines therefore focuses on the conduct of the defendant and the objective financial risk
to victims caused by that conduct”).
The amendment adopts the approach taken by the Tenth Circuit by revising the com-
mentary in Application Note 3(A)(ii) to provide that intended loss means the pecuniary
harm that “the defendant purposely sought to inflict.” The amendment reflects the
Commission’s continued belief that intended loss is an important factor in economic
crime offenses, but also recognizes that sentencing enhancements predicated on in-
tended loss, rather than losses that have actually accrued, should focus more specifi-
cally on the defendant’s culpability.
Sophisticated Means
Third, the amendment narrows the focus of the specific offense characteristic at
§2B1.1(b)(10)(C) to cases in which the defendant intentionally engaged in or caused
conduct constituting sophisticated means. Prior to the amendment, the enhancement
applied if “the offense otherwise involved sophisticated means.” Based on this lan-
guage, courts had applied this enhancement on the basis of the sophistication of the
overall scheme without a determination of whether the defendant’s own conduct was
“sophisticated.” See, e.g., United States v. Green, 648 F.3d 569, 576 (7th Cir. 2011);
United States v. Bishop-Oyedepo, 480 Fed. App’x 431, 433–34 (7th Cir. 2012); United
States v. Jenkins-Watt, 574 F.3d 950, 965 (8th Cir. 2009). The Commission concluded
that basing the enhancement on the defendant’s own intentional conduct better re-
flects the defendant’s culpability and will appropriately minimize application of this
enhancement to less culpable offenders.
Amendment 793
112 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Fraud on the Market
Finally, the amendment revises the special rule at Application Note 3(F)(ix) relating
to the calculation of loss in cases involving the fraudulent inflation or deflation in the
value of a publicly traded security or commodity. When this special rule was added to
the guidelines, it established a rebuttable presumption that the specified loss calcula-
tion methodology provides a reasonable estimate of the actual loss in such cases. As
amended, the method provided in the special rule is no longer the presumed starting
point for calculating loss in these cases. Instead, the revised special rule states that
the provided method is one method that courts may consider, but that courts, in deter-
mining loss, are free to use any method that is appropriate and practicable under the
circumstances. This amendment reflects the Commission’s view that the most appro-
priate method to determine a reasonable estimate of loss will often vary in these highly
complex and fact-intensive cases.
This amendment, in combination with related revisions to the mitigating role guideline
at §3B1.2 (Mitigating Role), reflects the Commission’s overall goal of focusing the eco-
nomic crime guideline more on qualitative harm to victims and individual offender
culpability.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2015.
AMENDMENT 793
AMENDMENT: Section 2D1.1(c) is amended in each of subdivisions (5), (6), (7), (8), and
(9) by striking the lines referenced to Schedule III Hydrocodone;
and in each of subdivisions (10), (11), (12), (13), (14), (15), (16), and (17) by striking the
lines referenced to Schedule III Hydrocodone, and in the lines referenced to Schedule
III substances (except Ketamine or Hydrocodone) by striking “or Hydrocodone”.
The annotation to §2D1.1(c) captioned “Notes to Drug Quantity Table” is amended in
Note (B) in the last paragraph by striking “The term ‘Oxycodone (actual)’ refers” and
inserting “The terms ‘Hydrocodone (actual)’ and ‘Oxycodone (actual)’ refer”.
The Commentary to §2D1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 8(D),
under the heading relating to Schedule I or II Opiates, by striking the line referenced
to Hydrocodone/Dihydrocodeinone and inserting the following:
“ 1 gm of Hydrocodone (actual) = 6700 gm of marihuana”;
in the heading relating to Schedule III Substances (except ketamine and hydrocodone)
by striking “and hydrocodone” both places such term appears;
and in the heading relating to Schedule III Hydrocodone by striking the heading and
subsequent paragraphs as follows:
“ Schedule III Hydrocodone****
1 unit of Schedule III hydrocodone = 1 gm of marihuana
Amendment 793
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 113
****Provided, that the combined equivalent weight of all Schedule III sub-
stances (except ketamine), Schedule IV substances (except flunitrazepam), and
Schedule V substances shall not exceed 2,999.99 kilograms of marihuana.”;
and in Note 27(C) by inserting after “methamphetamine,” the following: “hydroco-
done,”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment changes the way the primary drug traf-
ficking guideline calculates a defendant’s drug quantity in cases involving hydrocodone
in response to recent administrative actions by the Food and Drug Administration and
the Drug Enforcement Administration. The amendment adopts a marihuana equiva-
lency for hydrocodone (1 gram equals 6700 grams of marihuana) based on the weight
of the hydrocodone alone.
In 2013 and 2014, the Food and Drug Administration approved several new pharma-
ceuticals containing hydrocodone which can contain up to twelve times as much hydro-
codone in a single pill than was previously available. Separately, in October 2014, the
Drug Enforcement Administration moved certain commonly-prescribed pharmaceuti-
cals containing hydrocodone from the less-restricted Schedule III to the more-re-
stricted Schedule II. Among other things, the scheduling doubled the statutory maxi-
mum term of imprisonment available for trafficking in the pharmaceuticals that were
previously controlled under Schedule III from 10 years to 20 years. The change also
rendered obsolete the entries in the Drug Quantity Table and Drug Equivalency Table
in §2D1.1 (Unlawful Manufacturing, Importing, Exporting, or Trafficking (Including
Possession with Intent to Commit These Offenses); Attempt or Conspiracy) that set a
marihuana equivalency for the pharmaceuticals that were previously controlled under
Schedule III.
As a result of these administrative actions, all pharmaceuticals that include hydroco-
done are now subject to the same statutory penalties. There is wide variation in the
amount of hydrocodone available in these pharmaceuticals and in the amount of other
ingredients (such as binders, coloring, acetaminophen, etc.) they contain. This varia-
tion raises significant proportionality issues within §2D1.1, where drug quantity for
hydrocodone offenses has previously been calculated based on the weight of the entire
substance that contains hydrocodone or on the number of pills. Neither of these calcu-
lations directly took into account the amount of actual hydrocodone in the pills.
The amendment addresses these changed circumstances by setting a new marihuana
equivalency for hydrocodone based on the weight of the hydrocodone alone. Without
this change, defendants with less actual hydrocodone could have received a higher
guideline range than those with more hydrocodone because pills with less hydrocodone
can sometimes contain more non-hydrocodone ingredients, leading the lower-dose pills
to weigh more.
In setting the marihuana equivalency, the Commission considered: potency of the
drug, medical use of the drug, and patterns of abuse and trafficking, such as prevalence
of abuse, consequences of misuse including death or serious bodily injury from use, and
incidence of violence associated with its trafficking. The Commission noted that the
Drug Enforcement Administration’s rescheduling decision relied in part on the close
relationship between hydrocodone and oxycodone, a similar and commonly-prescribed
drug that was already controlled under Schedule II. Scientific literature, public com-
ment, and testimony supported the conclusion that the potency, medical use, and pat-
terns of abuse and trafficking of hydrocodone are very similar to oxycodone. In partic-
ular, the Commission heard testimony from abuse liability specialists and reviewed
Amendment 794
114 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
scientific literature indicating that, in studies conducted under standards established
by the Food and Drug Administration for determining the abuse liability of a particular
drug, the potencies of hydrocodone and oxycodone when abused are virtually identical,
even though some physicians who prescribe the two drugs in a clinical setting might
not prescribe them in equal doses. Public comment indicated that both hydrocodone
and oxycodone are among the top ten drugs most frequently encountered by law en-
forcement and that their methods of diversion and rates of diversion per kilogram of
available drug are similar. Public comment and review of the scientific literature also
indicated that the users of the two drugs share similar characteristics, and that some
users may use them interchangeably, a situation which may become more common as
the more powerful pharmaceuticals recently approved by the Food and Drug Admin-
istration become available.
Based on proportionality considerations and the Commission’s assessment that, for
purposes of the drug guideline, hydrocodone and oxycodone should be treated equiva-
lently, the amendment adopts a marihuana equivalency for hydrocodone (actual) that
is the same as the existing equivalency for oxycodone (actual): 1 gram equals
6,700 grams of marihuana.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2015.
AMENDMENT 794
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §3B1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in
Note 3(A) by inserting after “that makes him substantially less culpable than the av-
erage participant” the following: “in the criminal activity”, by striking “concerted” and
inserting “the”, by striking “is not precluded from consideration for” each place such
term appears and inserting “may receive”, by striking “role” both places such term
appears and inserting “participation”, and by striking “personal gain from a fraud of-
fense and who had limited knowledge” and inserting “personal gain from a fraud of-
fense or who had limited knowledge”;
in Note 3(C) by inserting at the end the following new paragraphs:
“ In determining whether to apply subsection (a) or (b), or an intermediate ad-
justment, the court should consider the following non-exhaustive list of factors:
(i) the degree to which the defendant understood the scope and structure
of the criminal activity;
(ii) the degree to which the defendant participated in planning or organiz-
ing the criminal activity;
(iii) the degree to which the defendant exercised decision-making authority
or influenced the exercise of decision-making authority;
(iv) the nature and extent of the defendant’s participation in the commis-
sion of the criminal activity, including the acts the defendant per-
formed and the responsibility and discretion the defendant had in per-
forming those acts;
Amendment 794
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 115
(v) the degree to which the defendant stood to benefit from the criminal
activity.
For example, a defendant who does not have a proprietary interest in the crim-
inal activity and who is simply being paid to perform certain tasks should be
considered for an adjustment under this guideline.
The fact that a defendant performs an essential or indispensable role in the
criminal activity is not determinative. Such a defendant may receive an ad-
justment under this guideline if he or she is substantially less culpable than
the average participant in the criminal activity.”;
in Note 4 by striking “concerted” and inserting “the criminal”;
and in Note 5 by inserting after “than most other participants” the following: “in the
criminal activity”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment is a result of the Commission’s study of
§3B1.2 (Mitigating Role). The Commission conducted a review of cases involving low-
level offenders, analyzed case law, and considered public comment and testimony.
Overall, the study found that mitigating role is applied inconsistently and more spar-
ingly than the Commission intended. In drug cases, the Commission’s study confirmed
that mitigating role is applied inconsistently to drug defendants who performed simi-
lar low-level functions (and that rates of application vary widely from district to dis-
trict). For example, application of mitigating role varies along the southwest border,
with a low of 14.3 percent of couriers and mules receiving the mitigating role adjust-
ment in one district compared to a high of 97.2 percent in another. Moreover, among
drug defendants who do receive mitigating role, there are differences from district to
district in application rates of the 2-, 3-, and 4-level adjustments. In economic crime
cases, the study found that the adjustment was often applied in a limited fashion. For
example, the study found that courts often deny mitigating role to otherwise eligible
defendants if the defendant was considered “integral” to the successful commission of
the offense.
This amendment provides additional guidance to sentencing courts in determining
whether a mitigating role adjustment applies. Specifically, it addresses a circuit con-
flict and other case law that may be discouraging courts from applying the adjustment
in otherwise appropriate circumstances. It also provides a non-exhaustive list of fac-
tors for the court to consider in determining whether an adjustment applies and, if so,
the amount of the adjustment.
Section 3B1.2 provides an adjustment of 2, 3, or 4 levels for a defendant who plays a
part in committing the offense that makes him or her “substantially less culpable than
the average participant.” However, there are differences among the circuits about what
determining the “average participant” requires. The Seventh and Ninth Circuits have
concluded that the “average participant” means only those persons who actually par-
ticipated in the criminal activity at issue in the defendant’s case, so that the defend-
ant’s relative culpability is determined only by reference to his or her co-participants
in the case at hand. See, e.g., United States v. Benitez, 34 F.3d 1489, 1498 (9th Cir.
1994); United States v. Cantrell, 433 F.3d 1269, 1283 (9th Cir. 2006); United States v.
DePriest, 6 F.3d 1201, 1214 (7th Cir. 1993). The First and Second Circuits have con-
cluded that the “average participant” also includes “the universe of persons participat-
ing in similar crimes.” See United States v. Santos, 357 F.3d 136, 142 (1st Cir. 2004);
see also United States v. Rahman, 189 F.3d 88, 159 (2d Cir. 1999). Under this latter
Amendment 794
116 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
approach, courts will ordinarily consider the defendant’s culpability relative both to
his co-participants and to the typical offender.
The amendment generally adopts the approach of the Seventh and Ninth Circuits, re-
vising the commentary to specify that, when determining mitigating role, the defend-
ant is to be compared with the other participants “in the criminal activity.” Focusing
the court’s attention on the individual defendant and the other participants is more
consistent with the other provisions of Chapter Three, Part B. See, e.g., §3B1.2 (the
adjustment is based on “the defendant’s role in the offense”); §3B1.2, comment. (n.3(C))
(a determination about mitigating role “is heavily dependent upon the facts of the par-
ticular case”); Ch. 3, Pt. B, intro. comment. (the determination about mitigating role
“is to be made on the basis of all conduct within the scope of §1B1.3 (Relevant Con-
duct)”).
Next, the amendment addresses cases in which the defendant was “integral” or “indis-
pensable” to the commission of the offense. Public comment suggested, and a review of
case law confirmed, that in some cases a defendant may be denied a mitigating role
adjustment solely because he or she was “integral” or “indispensable” to the commis-
sion of the offense. See, e.g., United States v. Skinner, 690 F.3d 772, 783–84 (6th Cir.
2012) (a “defendant who plays a lesser role in a criminal scheme may nonetheless fail
to qualify as a minor participant if his role was indispensible or critical to the success
of the scheme”); United States v. Panaigua-Verdugo, 537 F.3d 722, 725 (7th Cir. 2008)
(defendant “played an integral part in the transactions and therefore did not deserve
a minor participant reduction”); United States v. Deans, 590 F.3d 907, 910 (8th Cir.
2010) (“Numerous decisions have upheld the denial of minor role adjustments to de-
fendants who . . . play a critical role”); United States v. Carter, 971 F.2d 597, 600
(10th Cir. 1992) (because defendant was “indispensible to the completion of the crimi-
nal activity . . . to debate which one is less culpable than the others . . . is akin to the
old argument over which leg of a three-legged stool is the most important leg.”). How-
ever, a finding that the defendant was essential to the offense does not alter the re-
quirement, expressed in Note 3(A), that the court must assess the defendant’s culpa-
bility relative to the average participant in the offense. Accordingly, the amendment
revises the commentary to emphasize that “the fact that a defendant performs an es-
sential or indispensable role in the criminal activity is not determinative” and that
such a defendant may receive a mitigating role adjustment, if he or she is otherwise
eligible.
The amendment also revises two paragraphs in Note 3(A) that illustrate how mitigat-
ing role interacts with relevant conduct principles in §1B1.3. Specifically, the illustra-
tions provide that certain types of defendants are “not precluded from consideration
for” a mitigating role adjustment. The amendment revises these paragraphs to state
that these types of defendants “may receive” a mitigating role adjustment. The Com-
mission determined that the double-negative tone (“not precluded”) may have had the
unintended effect of discouraging courts from applying the mitigating role adjustment
in otherwise appropriate circumstances.
Finally, the amendment provides a non-exhaustive list of factors for the court to con-
sider in determining whether to apply a mitigating role adjustment and, if so, the
amount of the adjustment. The factors direct the court to consider the degree to which
the defendant understood the scope and structure of the criminal activity, participated
in planning or organizing the criminal activity, and exercised decision-making author-
ity, as well as the acts the defendant performed and the degree to which he or she stood
to benefit from the criminal activity. The Commission was persuaded by public com-
ment and a detailed review of cases involving low-level offenders, particularly in fraud
Amendment 795
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 117
cases, that providing a list of factors will give the courts a common framework for de-
termining whether to apply a mitigating role adjustment (and, if so, the amount of the
adjustment) and will help promote consistency.
The amendment further provides, as an example, that a defendant who does not have
a proprietary interest in the criminal activity and who is simply being paid to perform
certain tasks should be considered for a mitigating role adjustment.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2015.
AMENDMENT 795
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §2L1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in
Note 4(B) by striking “not counted as a single sentence” and inserting “not treated as
a single sentence”.
Section 4A1.1(e) is amended by striking “such sentence was counted as a single sen-
tence” and inserting “such sentence was treated as a single sentence”.
The Commentary to §4A1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 5 by
striking “are counted as a single sentence” and inserting “are treated as a single sen-
tence”; and by striking “are counted as a single prior sentence” and inserting “are
treated as a single prior sentence”.
Section 4A1.2(a)(2) is amended by striking “those sentences are counted separately or
as a single sentence” and inserting “those sentences are counted separately or treated
as a single sentence”; by striking “Count any prior sentence” and inserting “Treat any
prior sentence”; and by striking “if prior sentences are counted as a single sentence”
and inserting “if prior sentences are treated as a single sentence”.
The Commentary to §4A1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 3 by
redesignating Note 3 as Note 3(B), and by inserting at the beginning the following:
“ Application of ‘Single Sentence’ Rule (Subsection (a)(2)).—
(A) Predicate Offenses.—In some cases, multiple prior sentences are
treated as a single sentence for purposes of calculating the criminal
history score under §4A1.1(a), (b), and (c). However, for purposes of de-
termining predicate offenses, a prior sentence included in the single
sentence should be treated as if it received criminal history points, if it
independently would have received criminal history points. Therefore,
an individual prior sentence may serve as a predicate under the career
offender guideline (see §4B1.2(c)) or other guidelines with predicate of-
fenses, if it independently would have received criminal history points.
However, because predicate offenses may be used only if they are
counted “separately” from each other (see §4B1.2(c)), no more than one
prior sentence in a given single sentence may be used as a predicate
offense.
For example, a defendant’s criminal history includes one robbery con-
viction and one theft conviction. The sentences for these offenses were
imposed on the same day, eight years ago, and are treated as a single
Amendment 795
118 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
sentence under §4A1.2(a)(2). If the defendant received a one-year sen-
tence of imprisonment for the robbery and a two-year sentence of im-
prisonment for the theft, to be served concurrently, a total of 3 points
is added under §4A1.1(a). Because this particular robbery met the def-
inition of a felony crime of violence and independently would have re-
ceived 2 criminal history points under §4A1.1(b), it may serve as a
predicate under the career offender guideline.
Note, however, that if the sentences in the example above were im-
posed thirteen years ago, the robbery independently would have re-
ceived no criminal history points under §4A1.1(b), because it was not
imposed within ten years of the defendant’s commencement of the in-
stant offense. See §4A1.2(e)(2). Accordingly, it may not serve as a pred-
icate under the career offender guideline.”;
and in Note 3(B) (as so redesignated) by striking “Counting multiple prior sentences
as a single sentence” and inserting “Treating multiple prior sentences as a single sen-
tence”; and by striking “and the resulting sentences were counted as a single sentence”
and inserting “and the resulting sentences were treated as a single sentence”.
The Commentary to §4B1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking “the sentences for the two prior convictions will be counted as a single sen-
tence” and inserting “the sentences for the two prior convictions will be treated as a
single sentence”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to a circuit conflict regarding the
meaning of the “single sentence” rule, set forth in subsection (a)(2) of §4A1.2 (Defini-
tions and Instructions for Computing Criminal History), and its implications for the
career offender guideline and other guidelines that provide sentencing enhancements
for predicate offenses.
When the defendant’s criminal history includes two or more prior sentences that meet
certain criteria specified in §4A1.2(a)(2), those prior sentences are counted as a “single
sentence” rather than separately. Generally, this operates to reduce the cumulative
impact of prior sentences in determining a defendant’s criminal history score. Courts,
however, are divided over whether this “single sentence” rule also causes certain prior
convictions that ordinarily would qualify as predicate offenses under the career of-
fender guideline to be disqualified from serving as predicate offenses. See §4B1.2 (Def-
initions of Terms Used in Section 4B1.1), comment. (n.3).
In 2010, in King v. United States, the Eighth Circuit held that when two or more prior
sentences are treated as a single sentence under the guidelines, all the criminal history
points attributable to the single sentence are assigned to only one of the prior sentences
— specifically, the one that was the longest. King, 595 F.3d 844, 852 (8th Cir. 2010).
Accordingly, only that prior sentence may be considered a predicate offense for pur-
poses of the career offender guideline. Id. at 849, 852.
In 2014, in United States v. Williams, a panel of the Sixth Circuit considered and re-
jected King, because it permitted the defendant to “evade career offender status be-
cause he committed more crimes.” Williams, 753 F.3d 626, 639 (6th Cir. 2014) (empha-
sis in original). See also United States v. Cornog, 945 F.2d 1504, 1506 n.3 (11th Cir.
1991) (“It would be illogical . . . to ignore a conviction for a violent felony just because
it happened to be coupled with a nonviolent felony conviction having a longer sen-
tence.”).
Amendment 796
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 119
After the Williams decision, a different panel of the Eighth Circuit agreed with the
Sixth Circuit’s analysis but was not in a position to overrule the earlier panel’s decision
in King. See Donnell v. United States, 765 F.3d 817, 820 (8th Cir. 2014). The Eighth
Circuit has applied the analysis from King to a case involving the firearms guideline
and to a case in which the prior sentences were consecutive rather than concurrent.
See, e.g., Pierce v. United States, 686 F.3d 529, 533 n.3 (8th Cir. 2012) (firearms);
United States v. Parker, 762 F.3d 801, 808 (8th Cir. 2014) (consecutive sentences). This
issue has also been addressed by other courts, some which have followed the Sixth
Circuit’s approach in Williams. See, e.g., United States v. Carr, 2013 WL 4855341
(N.D. Ga. 2013); United States v. Agurs, 2014 WL 3735584 (W.D. Pa., July 28, 2014).
Other decisions have been consistent with the Eighth Circuit’s approach in King.
See, e.g., United States v. Santiago, 387 F. App’x 223 (3d Cir. 2010); United States v.
McQueen, 2014 WL 3749215 (E.D. Wash., July 28, 2014).
The amendment generally follows the Sixth Circuit’s approach in Williams. It amends
the commentary to §4A1.2 to provide that, for purposes of determining predicate of-
fenses, a prior sentence included in a single sentence should be treated as if it received
criminal history points if it independently would have received criminal history points.
It also provides examples, including an example to illustrate the potential impact of
the applicable time periods prescribed in §4A1.2(e). Finally, §§4A1.1 (Criminal History
Category) and 4A1.2 are revised stylistically so that sentences “counted” as a single
sentence are referred to instead as sentences “treated” as a single sentence.
The amendment ensures that those defendants who have committed more crimes, in
addition to a predicate offense, remain subject to enhanced penalties under certain
guidelines such as the career offender guideline. Conversely, by clarifying how the sin-
gle sentence rule interacts with the time limits set forth in §4A1.2(e), the amendment
provides that when a prior sentence was so remote in time that it does not inde-
pendently receive criminal history points, it cannot serve as a predicate offense.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2015.
AMENDMENT 796
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §1B1.11 captioned “Background” is amended by
striking “144 S. Ct.” and inserting “133 S. Ct.”.
The Commentary to §2B4.1 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by striking
“41 U.S.C. §§ 53, 54” and inserting “41 U.S.C. §§ 8702, 8707”.
The Commentary to §2B4.1 captioned “Background” is amended by striking “41 U.S.C.
§§ 51, 53–54” and inserting “41 U.S.C. §§ 8702, 8707”.
The Commentary to §2C1.8 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by striking
“2 U.S.C.” and all that follows through “441k;” and after “18 U.S.C. § 607” inserting
“; 52 U.S.C. §§ 30109(d), 30114, 30116, 30117, 30118, 30119, 30120, 30121, 30122,
30123, 30124(a), 30125, 30126”; and by striking “Statutory Index (Appendix A)” and
inserting “Appendix A (Statutory Index)”.
The Commentary to §2C1.8 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking “2 U.S.C. § 441e(b)” and inserting “52 U.S.C. § 30121(b)”; by striking “2 U.S.C.
Amendment 796
120 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
§ 431 et seq” and inserting “52 U.S.C. § 30101 et seq.”; and by striking “(2 U.S.C.
§ 431(8) and (9))” and inserting “(52 U.S.C. § 30101(8) and (9))”.
Section 2D1.11(e)(7) is amended in the line referenced to Norpseudoephedrine by strik-
ing “400” and inserting “400 G”.
The Commentary to §2H2.1 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by striking
“42 U.S.C. §§ 1973i, 1973j(a), (b)” and inserting “52 U.S.C. §§ 10307, 10308(a), (b)”.
The Commentary to §2H4.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 2 by
striking “et. seq.” and inserting “et seq.”.
The Commentary to §2M3.9 is amended by striking “§ 421” each place such term ap-
pears and inserting “§ 3121”; and by striking “§ 421(d)” and inserting “§ 3121(d)”.
The Commentary following §3D1.5 captioned “Illustrations of the Operation of the
Multiple-Count Rules” is amended by striking the heading as follows:
“ Illustrations of the Operation of the Multiple-Count Rules”,
and inserting the following new heading:
“ Concluding Commentary to Part D of Chapter Three
Illustrations of the Operation of the Multiple-Count Rules”;
in Example 1 by striking “convicted on” and inserting “convicted of”; and by striking
“$12,000” and inserting “$21,000”;
in Example 2 by striking “Defendant C” and inserting “Defendant B”; by striking “con-
victed on” and inserting “convicted of”; and by striking “offense level for bribery (22)”
and inserting “offense level for bribery (20)”;
and in Example 3 by striking “Defendant D” and inserting “Defendant C”; by striking
“$27,000”, “$12,000”, “$15,000”, and “$20,000” and inserting “$1,000” in each place
such terms appear; by striking “$74,000” and inserting “$4,000”; and by striking “16”
both places such term appears and inserting “9”.
The Commentary to §5E1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 5 by
striking “2 U.S.C. § 437g(d)(1)(D)” and inserting “52 U.S.C. § 30109(d)(1)(D)”; and by
striking “2 U.S.C. § 441f” and inserting “52 U.S.C. § 30122”.
Appendix A (Statutory Index) is amended by striking the following line references:
“2 U.S.C. § 437g(d) 2C1.8
2 U.S.C. § 439a 2C1.8
2 U.S.C. § 441a 2C1.8
2 U.S.C. § 441a-1 2C1.8
2 U.S.C. § 441b 2C1.8
2 U.S.C. § 441c 2C1.8
2 U.S.C. § 441d 2C1.8
2 U.S.C. § 441e 2C1.8
2 U.S.C. § 441f 2C1.8
2 U.S.C. § 441g 2C1.8
Amendment 796
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 121
2 U.S.C. § 441h(a) 2C1.8
2 U.S.C. § 441i 2C1.8
2 U.S.C. § 441k 2C1.8”,
and inserting at the end the following new line references:
“52 U.S.C. § 30109(d) 2C1.8
52 U.S.C. § 30114 2C1.8
52 U.S.C. § 30116 2C1.8
52 U.S.C. § 30117 2C1.8
52 U.S.C. § 30118 2C1.8
52 U.S.C. § 30119 2C1.8
52 U.S.C. § 30120 2C1.8
52 U.S.C. § 30121 2C1.8
52 U.S.C. § 30122 2C1.8
52 U.S.C. § 30123 2C1.8
52 U.S.C. § 30124(a) 2C1.8
52 U.S.C. § 30125 2C1.8
52 U.S.C. § 30126 2C1.8”;
by striking the following line references:
“42 U.S.C. § 1973i(c) 2H2.1
42 U.S.C. § 1973i(d) 2H2.1
42 U.S.C. § 1973i(e) 2H2.1
42 U.S.C. § 1973j(a) 2H2.1
42 U.S.C. § 1973j(b) 2H2.1
42 U.S.C. § 1973j(c) 2X1.1
42 U.S.C. § 1973aa 2H2.1
42 U.S.C. § 1973aa-1 2H2.1
42 U.S.C. § 1973aa-1a 2H2.1
42 U.S.C. § 1973aa-3 2H2.1
42 U.S.C. § 1973bb 2H2.1
42 U.S.C. § 1973gg-10 2H2.1”,
and inserting after the line referenced to 50 U.S.C. App. § 2410 the following new line
references:
“52 U.S.C. § 10307(c) 2H2.1
52 U.S.C. § 10307(d) 2H2.1
52 U.S.C. § 10307(e) 2H2.1
52 U.S.C. § 10308(a) 2H2.1
52 U.S.C. § 10308(b) 2H2.1
52 U.S.C. § 10308(c) 2X1.1
52 U.S.C. § 10501 2H2.1
52 U.S.C. § 10502 2H2.1
52 U.S.C. § 10503 2H2.1
52 U.S.C. § 10505 2H2.1
52 U.S.C. § 10701 2H2.1
52 U.S.C. § 20511 2H2.1”;
and by striking the line referenced to 50 U.S.C. § 421 and inserting after the line ref-
erenced to 50 U.S.C. § 1705 the following new line reference:
Amendment 796
122 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
“50 U.S.C. § 3121 2M3.9”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment makes certain technical changes to the
Guidelines Manual.
First, the amendment sets forth technical changes to reflect the editorial reclassifica-
tion of certain sections in the United States Code. Effective February 2014, the Office
of the Law Revision Counsel transferred provisions relating to voting and elections
from titles 2 and 42 to a new title 52. It also transferred provisions of the National
Security Act of 1947 from one place to another in title 50. To reflect the new section
numbers of the reclassified provisions, changes are made to—
(1) the Commentary to §2C1.8 (Making, Receiving, or Failing to Report a Contri-
bution, Donation, or Expenditure in Violation of the Federal Election Cam-
paign Act; Fraudulently Misrepresenting Campaign Authority; Soliciting or
Receiving a Donation in Connection with an Election While on Certain Federal
Property);
(2) the Commentary to §2H2.1 (Obstructing an Election or Registration);
(3) the Commentary to §2M3.9 (Disclosure of Information Identifying a Covert
Agent);
(4) Application Note 5 to §5E1.2 (Fines for Individual Defendants); and
(5) Appendix A (Statutory Index).
Second, it makes stylistic and technical changes to the Commentary following §3D1.5
(Determining the Total Punishment) captioned “Illustrations of the Operation of the
Multiple-Count Rules” to better reflect its purpose as a concluding commentary to
Part D of Chapter Three.
Finally, it makes clerical changes to—
(1) the Background Commentary to §1B1.11 (Use of Guidelines Manual in Effect
on Date of Sentencing (Policy Statement)), to correct a typographical error in
a U.S. Reports citation;
(2) the Commentary to §2B4.1 (Bribery in Procurement of Bank Loan and Other
Commercial Bribery), to correct certain United States Code citations to corre-
spond with their respective references in Appendix A that were revised by
Amendment 769 (effective November 1, 2012);
(3) subsection (e)(7) to §2D1.11 (Unlawfully Distributing, Importing, Exporting or
Possessing a Listed Chemical; Attempt or Conspiracy), to add a missing meas-
urement unit to the line referencing Norpseudoephedrine; and
(4) Application Note 2 to §2H4.2 (Willful Violations of the Migrant and Seasonal
Agricultural Worker Protection Act), to correct a typographical error in an ab-
breviation.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2015.
Amendment 797
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 123
AMENDMENT 797
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §1B1.3 captioned “Application Notes”, as amended
by Amendment 790, is further amended in Note 1 by inserting as the heading the fol-
lowing: “Sentencing Accountability and Criminal Liability.—”.
The Commentary to §1B1.3 captioned “Application Notes”, as amended by Amendment
790, is further amended by renumbering Notes 5 through 12 according to the following
table:
Before Amendment After Amendment
5 5(A)
11 5(B)
11(A) 5(B)(i)
11(B) 5(B)(ii)
10 5(C)
6 6(A)
7 6(B)
8 7
9 8
12 9
and by rearranging those Notes, as so renumbered, to place them in proper numerical
order.
The Commentary to §1B1.3 captioned “Application Notes”, as so renumbered and re-
arranged, is further amended by inserting headings at the beginning of certain notes,
as follows (with Notes referred to by their new numbers):
Note Heading to Be Inserted at the Beginning
5 Application of Subsection (a)(2).—
5(A) Relationship to Grouping of Multiple Counts.—
5(B) “Same Course of Conduct or Common Scheme or Plan”.—
5(C) Conduct Associated with a Prior Sentence.—
6 Application of Subsection (a)(3).—
6(A) Definition of “Harm”.—
Amendment 797
124 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
6(B) Risk or Danger of Harm.—
7 Factors Requiring Conviction under a Specific Statute.—
8 Partially Completed Offense.—
9 Solicitation, Misprision, or Accessory After the Fact.—
The Commentary to §2D1.1 captioned “Application Notes”, is amended in Note 8(D),
in the heading relating to Date Rape Drugs (except flunitrazipam, GHB, or ketamine),
by striking “flunitrazipam” and inserting “flunitrazepam”.
The Commentary to §2K2.1 captioned “Application Notes”, as amended by Amend-
ment 790, is further amended in Note 14(E) by striking “Application Note 11” both
places such term appears and inserting “Application Note 5(B)”.
The Commentary to §2X3.1 captioned “Application Notes”, as amended by Amend-
ment 790, is further amended in Note 1 by striking “Application Note 12” and inserting
“Application Note 9”.
The Commentary to §2X4.1 captioned “Application Notes”, as amended by Amend-
ment 790, is further amended in Note 1 by striking “Application Note 12” and inserting
“Application Note 9”.
The Commentary to §8C2.8 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 7 by
striking the period at the end and inserting “).”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment makes certain technical and conforming
changes to commentary in the Guidelines Manual.
First, the amendment reorganizes the commentary to §1B1.3 (Relevant Conduct (Fac-
tors that Determine the Guideline Range)), so that the order of the application notes
better reflects the order of the guideline provisions to which they relate. The Commis-
sion had previously reorganized notes 1 and 2 into notes 1 through 4, also redesignat-
ing notes 3 through 10 as notes 5 through 12, in a recently promulgated amendment.
See Amendment 790. This amendment further rearranges the commentary, specifi-
cally notes 5 through 12. The following table shows the renumbering of notes 5 through
12 that would result from the amendment in comparison to the current Guidelines
Manual and the recently promulgated amendment to §1B1.3.
2014 Guidelines Recently Promulgated Technical
Manual Amendment Amendment
3 5 5(A)
9 11 5(B)
8 10 5(C)
4 6 6(A)
5 7 6(B)
6 8 7
Amendment 798
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 125
7 9 8
10 12 9
The amendment also makes stylistic changes to the commentary to §1B1.3, such as
adding headings to certain application notes. To reflect the renumbering of application
notes in §1B1.3, conforming changes are also made to the commentary to §§2K2.1 (Un-
lawful Receipt, Possession, or Transportation of Firearms or Ammunition; Prohibited
Transactions Involving Firearms or Ammunition), 2X3.1 (Accessory After the Fact),
and 2X4.1 (Misprision of Felony).
Second, the amendment makes clerical changes to correct typographical errors in Ap-
plication Note 8(D) to §2D1.1 (Unlawful Manufacturing, Importing, Exporting, or Traf-
ficking (Including Possession with Intent to Commit These Offenses); Attempt or Con-
spiracy) and Application Note 7 to §8C2.8 (Determining the Fine Within the Range
(Policy Statement)).
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2015.
AMENDMENT 798
AMENDMENT: The Commentary to §4B1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended by
inserting at the beginning of Note 1 the following new heading: “Definitions.—”; by
inserting at the beginning of Note 2 the following new heading: “‘Offense Statutory
Maximum’.—”; and by inserting at the end the following new Note 4:
“4. Departure Provision for State Misdemeanors.—In a case in which one or both
of the defendant’s ‘two prior felony convictions’ is based on an offense that was
classified as a misdemeanor at the time of sentencing for the instant federal
offense, application of the career offender guideline may result in a guideline
range that substantially overrepresents the seriousness of the defendant’s
criminal history or substantially overstates the seriousness of the instant of-
fense. In such a case, a downward departure may be warranted without regard
to the limitation in §4A1.3(b)(3)(A).”.
Section 4B1.2(a) is amended by striking paragraph (2) as follows:
“ (2) is burglary of a dwelling, arson, or extortion, involves use of explosives,
or otherwise involves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of
physical injury to another.”,
and inserting the following:
“ (2) is murder, voluntary manslaughter, kidnapping, aggravated assault, a
forcible sex offense, robbery, arson, extortion, or the use or unlawful
possession of a firearm described in 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a) or explosive
material as defined in 18 U.S.C. § 841(c).”.
The Commentary to §4B1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended—
Amendment 798
126 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
in Note 1 by inserting “Definitions.—” as a heading before the beginning of the note;
by striking the second and third undesignated paragraphs as follows:
“ ‘Crime of violence’ includes murder, manslaughter, kidnapping, aggravated as-
sault, forcible sex offenses, robbery, arson, extortion, extortionate extension of
credit, and burglary of a dwelling. Other offenses are included as ‘crimes of
violence’ if (A) that offense has as an element the use, attempted use, or threat-
ened use of physical force against the person of another, or (B) the conduct set
forth (i.e., expressly charged) in the count of which the defendant was convicted
involved use of explosives (including any explosive material or destructive de-
vice) or, by its nature, presented a serious potential risk of physical injury to
another.
‘Crime of violence’ does not include the offense of unlawful possession of a fire-
arm by a felon, unless the possession was of a firearm described in 26 U.S.C.
§ 5845(a). Where the instant offense of conviction is the unlawful possession of
a firearm by a felon, §2K2.1 (Unlawful Receipt, Possession, or Transportation
of Firearms or Ammunition; Prohibited Transactions Involving Firearms or
Ammunition) provides an increase in offense level if the defendant had one or
more prior felony convictions for a crime of violence or controlled substance
offense; and, if the defendant is sentenced under the provisions of 18 U.S.C.
§ 924(e), §4B1.4 (Armed Career Criminal) will apply.”,
and inserting the following new paragraphs:
“ ‘Forcible sex offense’ includes where consent to the conduct is not given or is
not legally valid, such as where consent to the conduct is involuntary, incom-
petent, or coerced. The offenses of sexual abuse of a minor and statutory rape
are included only if the sexual abuse of a minor or statutory rape was (A) an
offense described in 18 U.S.C. § 2241(c) or (B) an offense under state law that
would have been an offense under section 2241(c) if the offense had occurred
within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States.
‘Extortion’ is obtaining something of value from another by the wrongful use of
(A) force, (B) fear of physical injury, or (C) threat of physical injury.”;
and by striking the fifth undesignated paragraph as follows:
“ Unlawfully possessing a firearm described in 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a) (e.g., a
sawed-off shotgun or sawed-off rifle, silencer, bomb, or machine gun) is a ‘crime
of violence’.”;
in Note 2, at the beginning of the note, by inserting the following new heading: “Offense
of Conviction as Focus of Inquiry.—”;
in Note 3, at the beginning of the note, by inserting the following new heading: “Ap-
plicability of §4A1.2.—”;
and by inserting at the end the following new Note 4:
“4. Upward Departure for Burglary Involving Violence.—There may be cases in
which a burglary involves violence, but does not qualify as a ‘crime of violence’
as defined in §4B1.2(a) and, as a result, the defendant does not receive a higher
offense level or higher Criminal History Category that would have applied if
Amendment 798
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 127
the burglary qualified as a ‘crime of violence.’ In such a case, an upward depar-
ture may be appropriate.”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment is a result of the Commission’s multi-year
study of statutory and guideline definitions relating to the nature of a defendant’s prior
conviction (e.g., “crime of violence,” “aggravated felony,” “violent felony,” “drug traf-
ficking offense,” and “felony drug offense”) and the impact of such definitions on the
relevant statutory and guideline provisions (e.g., career offender, illegal reentry, and
armed career criminal). As part of this study, the Commission considered feedback
from the field, including conducting a roundtable discussion on these topics and con-
sidering the varying case law interpreting these statutory and guideline definitions.
In particular, the Commission has received extensive comment, and is aware of nu-
merous court opinions, expressing a view that the definition of “crime of violence” is
complex and unclear. The amendment is informed by this public comment and case
law, as well as the Supreme Court’s recent decision in Johnson v. United States,
135 S. Ct. 2551 (2015), regarding the statutory definition of “violent felony” in
18 U.S.C. § 924(e) (commonly referred to as the “Armed Career Criminal Act” or
“ACCA”). While not addressing the guidelines, that decision has given rise to signifi-
cant litigation regarding the guideline definition of “crime of violence.” Finally, the
Commission analyzed a range of sentencing data, including a study of the sentences
relative to the guidelines for the career offender guidelines. See U.S. Sent’g Comm’n,
Quick Facts: Career Offenders (Nov. 2015) (highlighting the decreasing rate of within
range guideline sentences (27.5% in fiscal year 2014), which has been coupled with
increasing rates of government (45.6%) and non-government sponsored below range
sentences (25.9%)).
The amendment makes several changes to the definition of “crime of violence” at
§4B1.2 (Definitions of Terms Used in Section 4B1.1), which, prior to this amendment,
was defined as any offense under federal or state law, punishable by imprisonment for
a term exceeding one year, that
● has as an element the use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical force
against the person of another (“force clause” or “elements clause”),
see §4B1.2(a)(1);
● is murder, manslaughter, kidnapping, aggravated assault, forcible sex of-
fenses, robbery, arson, extortion, extortionate extension of credit, burglary of a
dwelling, or involves the use of explosives (“enumerated offenses”),
see §4B1.2(a)(2) and comment. (n.1); or
● otherwise involves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of physical
injury to another (“residual clause”), see §4B1.2(a)(2).
The “crime of violence” definition at §4B1.2 is used to trigger increased sentences un-
der several provisions in the Guidelines Manual, the most significant of which is
§4B1.1 (Career Offender). See also §§2K1.3, 2K2.1, 2S1.1, 4A1.1(e), 7B1.1. The career
offender guideline implements a directive to the Commission set forth at 28 U.S.C.
§ 994(h), which in turn identifies offenders for whom the guidelines must provide in-
creased punishment. Tracking the criteria set forth in section 994(h), the Commission
implemented the directive by identifying a defendant as a career offender if (1) the
defendant was at least eighteen years old at the time he or she committed the instant
offense of conviction; (2) the instant offense is a felony that is a crime of violence or a
controlled substance offense, and (3) the defendant has at least two prior felony con-
victions of either a crime of violence or a controlled substance offense. Where these
criteria are met, the directive at section 994(h), and therefore §4B1.1, provides for sig-
nificantly higher sentences under the guidelines, such that the guideline range is “at
Amendment 798
128 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
or near the maximum [term of imprisonment] authorized.” Commission data shows
that application of §4B1.1 resulted in an increased final offense level, an increased
Criminal History Category, or both for 91.3 percent of defendants sentenced under the
career offender guideline in fiscal year 2014. See U.S. Sent’g Comm’n, Quick Facts:
Career Offenders (Nov. 2015) (46.3% of career offenders received an increase in both
final offense level (from an average of 23 levels to 31 levels) and criminal history cate-
gory (from an average of category IV to category VI); 32.6% had just a higher final
offense level (from an average of 23 levels to 30 levels); and 12.4% had just a higher
Criminal History Category (from an average of category IV to category VI)).
Residual Clause
First, the amendment deletes the “residual clause” at §4B1.2(a)(2). Prior to the amend-
ment, the term “crime of violence” in §4B1.2 included any offense that “otherwise in-
volves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to another.”
In Johnson, the Supreme Court considered an identical residual clause relating to the
statutory definition of “violent felony” in the Armed Career Criminal Act. The Court
held that using the “residual clause” to classify an offense as a “violent felony” violated
due process because the clause was unconstitutionally vague. See Johnson, 135 S. Ct.
at 2563. While the Supreme Court in Johnson did not consider or address the sentenc-
ing guidelines, significant litigation has ensued regarding whether the Supreme
Court’s holding in Johnson should also apply to the residual clause in §4B1.2. Compare
United States v. Matchett, 802 F.3d 1185 (11th Cir. 2015) (rejecting the argument that
the residual clause in §4B1.2 is unconstitutionally vague in light of Johnson) and
United States v. Wilson, 622 F. App’x 393, 405 n.51 (5th Cir. 2015) (in considering the
applicability of Johnson, noting “[o]ur case law indicates that a defendant cannot bring
a vagueness challenge against a Sentencing Guideline”), with United States v. Taylor,
803 F.3d 931 (8th Cir. 2015) (finding that previous circuit precedent holding that the
guidelines cannot be unconstitutionally vague because they do not proscribe conduct
is doubtful after Johnson); United States v. Madrid, 805 F.3d 1204, 1211 (10th Cir.
2015) (holding that that the residual clause of §4B1.2(a)(2) is void for vagueness);
United States v. Harbin, 610 F. App’x 562 (6th Cir. 2015) (finding that defendant is
entitled to the same relief as offenders sentenced under the residual clause of the
ACCA); and United States v. Townsend, 638 F. App’x 172, 177–78 (3d Cir. 2015) (re-
manding for resentencing in light of the government’s concession that, pursuant to
Johnson, the defendant should not have been sentenced as a career offender).
The Commission determined that the residual clause at §4B1.2 implicates many of the
same concerns cited by the Supreme Court in Johnson, and, as a matter of policy,
amends §4B1.2(a)(2) to strike the clause. Removing the residual clause has the ad-
vantage of alleviating the considerable application difficulties associated with that
clause, as expressed by judges, probation officers, and litigants. Furthermore, remov-
ing the clause will alleviate some of the ongoing litigation and uncertainty resulting
from the Johnson decision.
List of Enumerated Offenses
With the deletion of the residual clause under subsection (a)(2), there are two remain-
ing components of the “crime of violence” definition – the “elements clause” and the
“enumerated offenses clause.” The “elements clause” set forth in subsection (a)(1) re-
mains unchanged by the amendment. Thus, any offense under federal or state law,
punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year, qualifies as a “crime of
violence” if it has as an element the use, or attempted use, or threatened use of physical
Amendment 798
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 129
force against the person of another. Importantly, such an offense may, but need not,
be specifically enumerated in subsection (a)(2) to qualify as a crime of violence.
The “enumerated offense clause” identifies specific offenses that qualify as crimes of
violence. In applying this clause, courts compare the elements of the predicate offense
of conviction with the elements of the enumerated offense in its “generic, contemporary
definition.” As has always been the case, such offenses qualify as crimes of violence
regardless of whether the offense expressly has as an element the use, attempted use,
or threatened use of physical force against the person of another. While most of the
offenses on the enumerated list under §4B1.2(a)(2) remain the same, the amendment
does revise the list in a number of ways to focus on the most dangerous repeat offend-
ers. The revised list is based on the Commission’s consideration of public hearing tes-
timony, a review of extensive public comment, and an examination of sentencing data
relating to the risk of violence in these offenses and the recidivism rates of career of-
fenders. Additionally, the Commission’s revisions to the enumerated list also consider
and reflect the fact that offenses not specifically enumerated will continue to qualify
as a crime of violence if they satisfy the elements clause.
As amended, the enumerated offenses include murder, voluntary manslaughter, kid-
napping, aggravated assault, forcible sex offenses, robbery, arson, extortion, or the use
or unlawful possession of a firearm described in 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a) or explosive ma-
terial as defined in 18 U.S.C. § 841(c). For easier application, all enumerated offenses
are now included in the guideline at §4B1.2; prior to the amendment, the list was set
forth in both §4B1.2(a)(2) and the commentary at Application Note 1.
Manslaughter, which is currently enumerated in Application Note 1, is revised to in-
clude only voluntary manslaughter. While Commission analysis indicates that it is
rare for involuntary manslaughter to be identified as a predicate for the career offender
guideline, this change provides that only voluntary manslaughter should be consid-
ered. This is also consistent with the fact that involuntary manslaughter generally
would not have qualified as a crime of violence under the “residual clause.” See Begay
v. United States, 553 U.S. 137 (2008) (limiting crimes covered by the ACCA residual
clause to those roughly similar in kind and degree of risk posed as the enumerated
offenses, which typically involve “purposeful, violent, and aggressive conduct”).
The amendment deletes “burglary of a dwelling” from the list of enumerated offenses.
In implementing this change, the Commission considered that (1) burglary offenses
rarely result in physical violence, (2) “burglary of a dwelling” is rarely the instant of-
fense of conviction or the determinative predicate for purposes of triggering higher
penalties under the career offender guideline, and (3) historically, career offenders
have rarely been rearrested for a burglary offense after release. The Commission con-
sidered several studies and analyses in reaching these conclusions.
First, several recent studies demonstrate that most burglaries do not involve physical
violence. See Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Crime Victimization Survey, Vic-
timization During Household Burglary (Sept. 2010) (finding that a household member
experienced some form of violent victimization in 7% of all household burglaries
from 2003 to 2007); Richard S. Culp et al., Is Burglary a Crime of Violence?
An Analysis of National Data 1998–2007, at 29 (2015), available at
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/248651.pdf (concluding that 7.6% of burgla-
ries between 1998 and 2007 resulted in actual violence or threats of violence, while
actual physical injury was reported in only 2.7% of all burglaries); see also United
States Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Uniform Crime Report,
Crime in the United States (2014) (classifying burglary as a “property crime” rather
Amendment 798
130 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
than a “violent crime”). Second, based upon an analysis of offenders sentenced in fiscal
year 2014, the Commission estimates that removing “burglary of a dwelling” as an
enumerated offense in §4B1.2(a)(2) will reduce the overall proportion of offenders who
qualify as a career offender by less than three percentage points. The Commission fur-
ther estimates that removing the enumerated offense would result in only about five
percent of offenders sentenced under USSG §2K2.1 (Unlawful Receipt, Possession, or
Transportation of Firearms or Ammunition; Prohibited Transactions Involving Fire-
arms or Ammunition) receiving a lower base offense level than would currently apply.
Finally, a Commission analysis of recidivism rates for career offenders released during
calendar years 2004 through 2006 indicates that about five percent of such offenders
were rearrested for a burglary offense during the eight years after their release.
In reaching this conclusion, the Commission also considered that courts have struggled
with identifying a uniform contemporary, generic definition of “burglary of dwelling.”
In particular, circuits have disagreed regarding whether the requirement in Taylor v.
United States, 495 U.S. 575, 598 (1990), that the burglary be of a “building or other
structure” applies in addition to the guidelines’ requirement that the burglary be of a
“dwelling.” Compare United States v. Henriquez, 757 F.3d 144, 148–49 (4th Cir. 2014);
United States v. McFalls, 592 F.3d 707 (6th Cir. 2010); United States v. Wenner,
351 F.3d 969 (9th Cir. 2003) with United States v. Ramirez, 708 F.3d 295, 301 (1st Cir.
2013); United States v. Murillo-Lopez, 444 F.3d 337, 340 (5th Cir. 2006); United States
v. Rivera-Oros, 590 F.3d 1123 (10th Cir. 2009); United States v. McClenton, 53 F.3d
584 (3d Cir. 1995); United States v. Graham, 982 F.2d 315 (8th Cir. 1992).
Although “burglary of a dwelling” is deleted as an enumerated offense, the amendment
adds an upward departure provision to §4B1.2 to address the unusual case in which
the instant offense or a prior felony conviction was any burglary offense involving vio-
lence that did not otherwise qualify as a “crime of violence.” This departure provision
allows courts to consider all burglary offenses, as opposed to just burglaries of a dwell-
ing, and reflects the Commission’s determination that courts should consider an up-
ward departure where a defendant would have received a higher offense level, higher
Criminal History Category, or both (e.g., where the defendant would have been a ca-
reer offender) if such burglary had qualified as a “crime of violence.”
Finally, the amendment adds offenses that involve the “use or unlawful possession of
a firearm described in 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a) or an explosive material as defined in
18 U.S.C. § 841(c)” to the enumerated list at §4B1.2(a)(2). This addition is consistent
with long-standing commentary in §4B1.2 categorically identifying possession of a fire-
arm described in 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a) as a “crime of violence,” and therefore maintains
the status quo. The Commission continues to believe that possession of these types of
weapons (e.g., a sawed-off shotgun or sawed-off rifle, silencer, bomb, or machine gun)
inherently presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to another person. Addi-
tionally, inclusion as an enumerated offense reflects Congress’s determination that
such weapons are inherently dangerous and, when possessed unlawfully, serve only
violent purposes. See also USSG App. C, amend. 674 (effective Nov. 1, 2004) (expand-
ing the definition of “crime of violence” in Application Note 1 to §4B1.2 to include un-
lawful possession of any firearm described in 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a)).
Enumerated Offense Definitions
The amendment also adds definitions for the enumerated offenses of forcible sex of-
fense and extortion. The amended guideline, however, continues to rely on existing
case law for purposes of defining the remaining enumerated offenses. The Commission
Amendment 798
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 131
determined that adding several new definitions could result in new litigation, and that
it was instead best not to disturb the case law that has developed over the years.
As amended, “forcible sex offense” includes offenses with an element that consent to
the conduct is not given or is not legally valid, such as where consent to the conduct is
involuntary, incompetent, or coerced. Consistent with the definition in §2L1.2 (Unlaw-
fully Entering or Remaining in the United States), this addition reflects the Commis-
sion’s determination that certain forcible sex offenses which do not expressly include
as an element the use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical force against the
person of another should nevertheless constitute “crimes of violence” under §4B1.2.
See also USSG App. C, amend. 722 (effective Nov. 1, 2008) (clarifying the scope of the
term “forcible sex offense” as that term is used in the definition of “crime of violence”
in §2L1.2, Application Note 1(B)(iii)).
The new commentary also provides that the offenses of sexual abuse of a minor and
statutory rape are included only if the sexual abuse of a minor or statutory rape was
(A) an offense described in 18 U.S.C. § 2241(c), or (B) an offense under state law that
would have been an offense under section 2241(c) if the offense had occurred within
the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States. This addition
makes clear that the term “forcible sex offense” in §4B1.2 includes sexual abuse of a
minor and statutory rape where certain specified elements are present.
“Extortion” is defined as “obtaining something of value from another by the wrongful
use of (i) force, (ii) fear of physical injury, or (iii) threat of physical injury.” Under case
law existing at the time of this amendment, courts generally defined extortion as “ob-
taining something of value from another with his consent induced by the wrongful use
of force, fear, or threats” based on the Supreme Court’s holding in United States v.
Nardello, 393 U.S. 286, 290 (1969) (defining “extortion” for purposes of the Hobbs Act).
Consistent with the Commission’s goal of focusing the career offender and related en-
hancements on the most dangerous offenders, the amendment narrows the generic
definition of extortion by limiting the offense to those having an element of force or an
element of fear or threats “of physical injury,” as opposed to non-violent threats such
as injury to reputation.
Departure Provision at §4B1.1
Finally, the amendment adds a downward departure provision in §4B1.1 for cases in
which one or both of the defendant’s “two prior felony convictions” is based on an of-
fense that is classified as a misdemeanor at the time of sentencing for the instant fed-
eral offense.
An offense (whether a “crime of violence” or a “controlled substance offense”) is deemed
to be a “felony” for purposes of the career offender guideline if it is punishable by im-
prisonment for a term exceeding one year. This definition captures some state offenses
that are punishable by more than a year of imprisonment, but are in fact classified by
the state as misdemeanors. Such statutes are found, for example, in Colorado, Iowa,
Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Vermont.
The Commission determined that the application of the career offender guideline
where one or both of the defendant’s “two prior felony convictions” is an offense that is
classified as a misdemeanor may result in a guideline range that substantially
overrepresents the seriousness of the defendant’s criminal history or substantially
overstates the seriousness of the instant offense. While recognizing the importance of
maintaining a uniform and consistent definition of the term “felony” in the guidelines,
Amendment 799
132 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
the Commission determined that it is also appropriate for a court to consider the seri-
ousness of the prior offenses (as reflected in the classification assigned by the convict-
ing jurisdiction) in deciding whether the significant increases under the career offender
guideline are appropriate. Such consideration is consistent with the structure used by
Congress in the context of the Armed Career Criminal Act. See 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(20)
(providing, for purposes of Chapter 44 of Title 18, that “crime punishable by imprison-
ment for a term exceeding one year” does not include a State offense classified as a
misdemeanor and punishable by two years or less). It is also consistent with the court’s
obligation to account for the “nature and circumstances of the offense and the history
and characteristics of the defendant.” See 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(1).
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is August 1, 2016.
AMENDMENT 799
AMENDMENT: Section 1B1.13 is amended in the heading by striking “as a Result of
Motion by Director of Bureau of Prisons” and inserting “Under 18 U.S.C.
§ 3582(c)(1)(A)”.
The Commentary to §1B1.13 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking the heading as follows: “Application of Subdivision (1)(A).—”; by striking
Note 1(A) as follows:
“(A) Extraordinary and Compelling Reasons.—Provided the defendant meets the
requirements of subdivision (2), extraordinary and compelling reasons exist
under any of the following circumstances:
(i) The defendant is suffering from a terminal illness.
(ii) The defendant is suffering from a permanent physical or medical con-
dition, or is experiencing deteriorating physical or mental health be-
cause of the aging process, that substantially diminishes the ability of
the defendant to provide self-care within the environment of a correc-
tional facility and for which conventional treatment promises no sub-
stantial improvement.
(iii) The death or incapacitation of the defendant’s only family member ca-
pable of caring for the defendant’s minor child or minor children.
(iv) As determined by the Director of the Bureau of Prisons, there exists in
the defendant’s case an extraordinary and compelling reason other
than, or in combination with, the reasons described in subdivisions (i),
(ii), and (iii).”;
by redesignating Notes 1(B) and 2 as Notes 3 and 5, respectively, and inserting before
Note 3 (as so redesignated) the following new Notes 1 and 2:
“1. Extraordinary and Compelling Reasons.—Provided the defendant meets the
requirements of subdivision (2), extraordinary and compelling reasons exist
under any of the circumstances set forth below:
Amendment 799
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 133
(A) Medical Condition of the Defendant.—
(i) The defendant is suffering from a terminal illness (i.e., a seri-
ous and advanced illness with an end of life trajectory). A spe-
cific prognosis of life expectancy (i.e., a probability of death
within a specific time period) is not required. Examples include
metastatic solid-tumor cancer, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS), end-stage organ disease, and advanced dementia.
(ii) The defendant is—
(I) suffering from a serious physical or medical condition,
(II) suffering from a serious functional or cognitive impair-
ment, or
(III) experiencing deteriorating physical or mental health
because of the aging process,
that substantially diminishes the ability of the defendant to
provide self-care within the environment of a correctional facil-
ity and from which he or she is not expected to recover.
(B) Age of the Defendant.—The defendant (i) is at least 65 years old; (ii) is
experiencing a serious deterioration in physical or mental health be-
cause of the aging process; and (iii) has served at least 10 years or
75 percent of his or her term of imprisonment, whichever is less.
(C) Family Circumstances.—
(i) The death or incapacitation of the caregiver of the defendant’s
minor child or minor children.
(ii) The incapacitation of the defendant’s spouse or registered part-
ner when the defendant would be the only available caregiver
for the spouse or registered partner.
(D) Other Reasons.—As determined by the Director of the Bureau of Pris-
ons, there exists in the defendant’s case an extraordinary and compel-
ling reason other than, or in combination with, the reasons described
in subdivisions (A) through (C).
2. Foreseeability of Extraordinary and Compelling Reasons.—For purposes of
this policy statement, an extraordinary and compelling reason need not have
been unforeseen at the time of sentencing in order to warrant a reduction in
the term of imprisonment. Therefore, the fact that an extraordinary and com-
pelling reason reasonably could have been known or anticipated by the sen-
tencing court does not preclude consideration for a reduction under this policy
statement.”;
in Note 3 (as so redesignated) by striking “subdivision (1)(A)” and inserting “this policy
statement”;
and by inserting after Note 3 (as so redesignated) the following new Note 4:
Amendment 799
134 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
“4. Motion by the Director of the Bureau of Prisons.—A reduction under this policy
statement may be granted only upon motion by the Director of the Bureau of
Prisons pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A). The Commission encourages the
Director of the Bureau of Prisons to file such a motion if the defendant meets
any of the circumstances set forth in Application Note 1. The court is in a
unique position to determine whether the circumstances warrant a reduction
(and, if so, the amount of reduction), after considering the factors set forth
18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) and the criteria set forth in this policy statement, such as
the defendant’s medical condition, the defendant’s family circumstances, and
whether the defendant is a danger to the safety of any other person or to the
community.
This policy statement shall not be construed to confer upon the defendant any
right not otherwise recognized in law.”.
The Commentary to §1B1.13 captioned “Background” is amended by striking “This
policy statement implements 28 U.S.C. § 994(t).” and inserting the following:
“The Commission is required by 28 U.S.C. § 994(a)(2) to develop general policy state-
ments regarding application of the guidelines or other aspects of sentencing that in the
view of the Commission would further the purposes of sentencing (18 U.S.C.
§ 3553(a)(2)), including, among other things, the appropriate use of the sentence mod-
ification provisions set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c). In doing so, the Commission is
authorized by 28 U.S.C. § 994(t) to ‘describe what should be considered extraordinary
and compelling reasons for sentence reduction, including the criteria to be applied and
a list of specific examples.’ This policy statement implements 28 U.S.C. § 994(a)(2)
and (t).”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment is a result of the Commission’s review of
the policy statement pertaining to “compassionate release” at §1B1.13 (Reduction in
Term of Imprisonment as a Result of Motion by Director of Bureau of Prisons). The
amendment broadens certain eligibility criteria and encourages the Director of the Bu-
reau of Prisons to file a motion for compassionate release when “extraordinary and
compelling reasons” exist.
Section 3582(c)(1)(A) of title 18, United States Code, authorizes a federal court, upon
motion of the Director of the Bureau of Prisons, to reduce the term of imprisonment of
a defendant if “extraordinary and compelling reasons” warrant such a reduction or the
defendant is at least 70 years of age and meets certain other criteria. Such a reduction
must be consistent with applicable policy statements issued by the Sentencing Com-
mission. See 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A); see also 28 U.S.C. §§ 992(a)(2) (stating that the
Commission shall promulgate general policy statements regarding “the sentence mod-
ification provisions set forth in section[] . . . 3582(c) of title 18”); and 994(t) (stating
that the Commission, in promulgating any such policy statements, “shall describe
what should be considered extraordinary and compelling reasons for sentence reduc-
tion, including the criteria to be applied and a list of specific examples”). In turn, the
Commission promulgated the policy statement at §1B1.13, which defines “extraordi-
nary and compelling reasons” for compassionate release.
The Bureau of Prisons has developed its own criteria for the implementation of sec-
tion 3582(c)(1)(A). See U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Prisons, Com-
passionate Release/Reduction in Sentence: Procedures for Implementation of 18 U.S.C.
§§ 3582(c)(1)(A) and 4205(g) (Program Statement 5050.49, CN-1). Under its program
Amendment 799
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 135
statement, a sentence reduction may be based on the defendant’s medical circum-
stances (e.g., a terminal or debilitating medical condition; see 5050.49(3)(a)–(b)) or on
certain non-medical circumstances (e.g., an elderly defendant, the death or incapacita-
tion of the family member caregiver of an inmate’s minor child, or the incapacitation
of the defendant’s spouse or registered partner when the inmate would be the only
available caregiver; see 5050.49(4),(5),(6)).
The Commission has conducted an in-depth review of this topic, including considera-
tion of Bureau of Prisons data documenting lengthy review of compassionate release
applications and low approval rates, as well as two reports issued by the Department
of Justice Office of the Inspector General that are critical of the Bureau of Prisons’
implementation of its compassionate release program. See U.S. Department of Justice,
Office of the Inspector General, The Federal Bureau of Prisons’ Compassionate Release
Program, I-2013-006 (April 2013); U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the Inspector
General, The Impact of the Aging Inmate Population on the Federal Bureau of Prisons,
E-15-05 (May 2015). In February 2016, the Commission held a public hearing on com-
passionate release and received testimony from witnesses and experts about the need
to broaden the criteria for eligibility, to add guidance to the medical criteria, and to
remove other administrative hurdles that limit the availability of compassionate re-
lease for otherwise eligible defendants.
The amendment revises §1B1.13 in several ways. First, the amendment broadens the
Commission’s guidance on what should be considered “extraordinary and compelling
reasons” for compassionate release. It provides four categories of criteria: “Medical
Condition of the Defendant,” “Age of the Defendant,” “Family Circumstances,” and
“Other Reasons.”
The “Medical Condition of the Defendant” category has two prongs: one for defendants
with terminal illness, and one that applies to defendants with a debilitating condition.
For the first subcategory, the amendment clarifies that terminal illness means “a se-
rious and advanced illness with an end of life trajectory,” and it explicitly states that
a “specific prognosis of life expectancy (i.e. a probability of death within a specific time
period) is not required.” These changes respond to testimony and public comment on
the challenges associated with diagnosing terminal illness. In particular, while an end-
of-life trajectory may be determined by medical professionals with some certainty, it is
extremely difficult to determine death within a specific time period. For that reason,
the Commission concluded that requiring a specified prognosis (such as the 18-month
prognosis in the Bureau of Prisons’ program statement) is unnecessarily restrictive
both in terms of the administrative review and the scope of eligibility for compassion-
ate release applications. For added clarity, the amendment also provides a non-exhaus-
tive list of illnesses that may qualify as a terminal illness.
For the non-terminal medical category, the amendment provides three broad criteria
to include defendants who are (i) suffering from a serious condition, (ii) suffering from
a serious functional or cognitive impairment, or (iii) experiencing deteriorating health
because of the aging process, for whom the medical condition substantially diminishes
the defendant’s ability to provide self-care within a correctional facility and from which
he or she is not expected to recover. The primary change to this category is the addition
of prong (II) regarding a serious functional or cognitive impairment. This additional
prong is intended to include a wide variety of permanent, serious impairments and
disabilities, whether functional or cognitive, that make life in prison overly difficult for
certain inmates.
Amendment 799
136 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
The amendment also adds an age-based category (“Age of the Defendant”) for eligibility
in §1B1.13. This new category would apply if the defendant (i) is at least 65 years old,
(ii) is experiencing a serious deterioration in health because of the aging process, and
(iii) has served at least 10 years or 75 percent of his or her term of imprisonment
(whichever is less). The age-based category resembles criteria in the Bureau of Prisons’
program statement, but adds a limitation that the defendant must be experiencing
seriously deteriorating health because of the aging process. The amendment also clar-
ifies that the time-served aspect should be applied with regard to “whichever is less,”
an important distinction from the Bureau of Prisons’ criteria, which has limited appli-
cation to only those elderly offenders serving significant terms of imprisonment. The
Commission determined that 65 years should be the age for eligibility under the age-
based category after considering the Commission’s recidivism research, which finds
that inmates aged 65 years and older exhibit a very low rate of recidivism (13.3%) as
compared to other age groups. The Commission expects that the broadening of the
medical conditions categories, cited above, will lead to increased eligibility for inmates
who suffer from certain conditions or impairments, and who experience a diminished
ability to provide self-care in prison, regardless of their age.
The amendment also includes a “Family Circumstances” category for eligibility that
applies to (i) the death or incapacitation of the caregiver of the defendant’s minor child,
or (ii) the incapacitation of the defendant’s spouse or registered partner when the de-
fendant would be the only available caregiver. The amendment deletes the require-
ment under prong (i) regarding the death or incapacitation of the “defendant’s only
family member” caregiver, given the possibility that the existing caregiver may not be
of family relation. The Commission also added prong (ii), which makes this category of
criteria consistent with similar considerations in the Bureau of Prisons’ program state-
ment.
Second, the amendment updates the Commentary in §1B1.13 to provide that an ex-
traordinary and compelling reason need not have been unforeseen at the time of sen-
tencing in order to warrant a reduction. The Commission heard from stakeholders and
medical experts that the corresponding limitation in the Bureau of Prisons’ program
statement ignores the often precipitous decline in health or circumstances that can
occur after imprisonment. The Commission determined that potential foreseeability at
the time of sentencing should not automatically preclude the defendant’s eligibility for
early release under §1B1.13.
Finally, the amendment adds a new application note that encourages the Director of
the Bureau of Prisons to file a motion under 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(A) if the defendant
meets any of the circumstances listed as “extraordinary and compelling reasons” in
§1B1.13. The Commission heard testimony and received public comment concerning
the inefficiencies that exist within the Bureau of Prisons’ administrative review of com-
passionate release applications, which can delay or deny release, even in cases where
the applicant appears to meet the criteria for eligibility. While only the Director of the
Bureau of Prisons has the statutory authority to file a motion for compassionate re-
lease, the Commission finds that “the court is in a unique position to assess whether
the circumstances exist, and whether a reduction is warranted (and, if so, the amount
of reduction), including the factors set forth 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) and the criteria set
forth in this policy statement, such as the defendant’s medical condition, the defend-
ant’s family circumstances, and whether the defendant is a danger to the safety of any
other person or to the community.” The Commission’s policy statement is not legally
binding on the Bureau of Prisons and does not confer any rights on the defendant, but
the new commentary is intended to encourage the Director of the Bureau of Prisons to
Amendment 800
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 137
exercise his or her authority to file a motion under section 3582(c)(1)(A) when the cri-
teria in this policy statement are met.
The amendment also adds to the Background that the Commission’s general policy-
making authority at 28 U.S.C. § 994(a)(2) serves as an additional basis for this and
other guidance set forth in §1B1.13, and the amendment changes the title of the policy
statement. These changes are clerical.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2016.
AMENDMENT 800
AMENDMENT: Section 2E3.1 is amended in subsection (a) by striking subsection (a)(2)
as follows:
“(2) 10, if the offense involved an animal fighting venture; or”;
by redesignating subsections (a)(1) and (a)(3) as subsections (a)(2) and (a)(4), respec-
tively; in subsection (a)(2) (as so redesignated) by striking “operation; or” and inserting
“operation;”; by inserting before subsection (a)(2) (as so redesignated) the following
new subsection (a)(1):
“(1) 16, if the offense involved an animal fighting venture, except as provided in
subdivision (3) below;”;
and by inserting before subsection (a)(4) (as so redesignated) the following new subsec-
tion (a)(3):
“(3) 10, if the defendant was convicted under 7 U.S.C. § 2156(a)(2)(B); or”.
The Commentary to §2E3.1 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by inserting
after “7 U.S.C. § 2156” the following: “(felony provisions only)”.
The Commentary to §2E3.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking “: ‘Animal” and inserting “, ‘animal”;
and in Note 2 by striking “If the offense involved extraordinary cruelty to an animal
that resulted in, for example, maiming or death to an animal, an upward departure
may be warranted.”, and inserting the following:
“The base offense levels provided for animal fighting ventures in subsection (a)(1)
and (a)(3) reflect that an animal fighting venture involves one or more violent fights
between animals and that a defeated animal often is severely injured in the fight, dies
as a result of the fight, or is killed afterward. Nonetheless, there may be cases in which
the offense level determined under this guideline substantially understates the seri-
ousness of the offense. In such a case, an upward departure may be warranted. For
example, an upward departure may be warranted if (A) the offense involved extraor-
dinary cruelty to an animal beyond the violence inherent in such a venture (such as by
killing an animal in a way that prolongs the suffering of the animal); or (B) the offense
involved animal fighting on an exceptional scale (such as an offense involving an unu-
sually large number of animals).”.
Amendment 800
138 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Appendix A (Statutory Index) is amended in the line referenced to 7 U.S.C. § 2156 by
inserting after “§ 2156” the following: “(felony provisions only)”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to two legislative changes to the
Animal Welfare Act (the “Act”) (codified at 7 U.S.C. § 2156) made by Congress in 2008
and 2014. First, in 2008, Congress amended the Act to increase the maximum term of
imprisonment for offenses involving an animal fighting venture from three years to
five years. See Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008, Pub. L. No. 110–234,
§ 14207(b), 122 Stat. 1461, 1462 (May 22, 2008). Second, in 2014, Congress again
amended the Act to create two new offenses – the offense of attending an animal fight
and the offense of causing an individual under the age of 16 to attend an animal fight,
with respective statutory maximum terms of imprisonment of one and three years.
See Agricultural Act of 2014, Pub. L. 113–79, § 12308, 128 Stat. 990, 990 (Feb. 7, 2014).
The amendment makes several changes to §2E3.1 (Gambling Offenses, Animal
Fighting Offenses) to account for these legislative actions. The amendment is informed
by extensive public comment, recent case law, and analysis of Commission data re-
garding the current penalties for animal fighting offenses.
Higher Penalties for Animal Fighting Venture Offenses
First, the amendment increases the base offense level for offenses involving an animal
fighting venture from 10 to 16. This change reflects the increase in the statutory max-
imum penalty from three to five years for offenses prohibited under 7 U.S.C.
§ 2156(a)–(e). See 18 U.S.C. § 49 (containing the criminal penalties for violations of
section 2156). The Commission also determined that the increased base offense level
better accounts for the cruelty and violence that is characteristic of these crimes, as
reflected in the extensive public comment and testimony noting that a defeated animal
is often severely injured or killed during or after a fight and that the animals used in
these crimes are commonly exposed to inhumane living conditions or other forms of
neglect.
In making this change, the Commission was also informed by data evidencing a high
percentage of above range sentences in these cases. During fiscal years 2011 through
2014, almost one-third (31.0%) of the seventy-four offenders who received the base of-
fense level of 10 under §2E3.1 received an above range sentence, compared to a na-
tional above range rate of 2.0 percent for all offenders. For those animal fighting of-
fenders sentenced above the range, the average extent of the upward departure was
more than twice the length of imprisonment at the high end of the guideline range,
resulting in an average sentence of 18 months (and a median sentence of 16 months).
Comparably, the amended base offense level will result in a guideline range of 12 to
18 months for the typical animal fighting venture offender who is in Criminal History
Category I and receives a three-level reduction for acceptance of responsibility under
§3E1.1 (Acceptance of Responsibility). Additionally, for offenders in the higher crimi-
nal history categories, the guideline range at base offense level 16 allows for applicable
Chapter Three increases while remaining within the statutory maximum.
New Offenses Relating to Attending an Animal Fighting Venture
The amendment also establishes a base offense level of 10 in §2E3.1 if the defendant
was convicted under section 2156(a)(2)(B) for causing an individual under 16 to attend
an animal fighting venture. The Commission believes this level of punishment best
reflects Congress’s intent in creating this new crime. A base offense level of 10 for this
new offense will result in a guideline range (before acceptance of responsibility) of 6 to
Amendment 801
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 139
12 months of imprisonment for offenders in Criminal History Category I, while allow-
ing for a guideline range approaching the three-year statutory maximum for offenders
in higher criminal history categories. The Commission also noted that assigning a base
offense level of 10 is consistent with the policy decision made by the Commission when
it assigned a base offense level of 10 to an animal fighting crime in 2008, which, at that
time, also had a three-year statutory maximum penalty. See USSG App. C, amend. 721
(effective November 1, 2008).
Lastly, the amendment establishes a base offense level of 6 for the new class A misde-
meanor of attending an animal fighting venture prohibited by section 2156(a)(2)(A) by
including only the felony provisions of 7 U.S.C. §2156 in the Appendix A reference to
§2E3.1. Consistent with other Class A misdemeanor offenses, this base offense level is
established through application of §2X5.2 (Class A Misdemeanors (Not Covered by An-
other Specific Offense Guideline)).
Departure Provision
The amendment also revises and expands the existing upward departure language in
two ways.
First, the amendment clarifies the circumstances in which an upward departure for
exceptional cruelty may be warranted. As reflected in the revised departure provision,
the base offense levels provided for animal fighting ventures in subsections (a)(1)
and (a)(3) reflect the fact that an animal fighting venture involves one or more violent
fights between animals and that a defeated animal often is severely injured in the
fight, dies as a result of the fight, or is killed afterward. The Commission heard testi-
mony that in a typical dog fight, dogs puncture and tear at each other, until one animal
is too injured to continue, and during a cock fight, roosters strike each other with their
beaks and with sharp blades that have been strapped to their legs, suffering punctured
lungs, broken bones, and pierced eyes. Nonetheless, as informed by public comment
and testimony, the Commission’s study indicates that some animal fighting offenses
involve extraordinary cruelty to an animal beyond that which is common to such
crimes, such as killing an animal in a way that prolongs the suffering of the animal.
The Commission determined that such extraordinary cruelty may fall outside the
heartland of conduct encompassed by the base offense level for animal fighting ven-
tures and, therefore, that an upward departure may be warranted in those cases.
Similarly, the amendment expands the existing departure provision to include offenses
involving animal fighting on an exceptional scale (such as offenses involving an unu-
sually large number of animals) as another example of conduct that may warrant an
upward departure. As with the example of extraordinary cruelty, the Commission de-
termined that the base offense level under the revised guideline may understate the
seriousness of the offense in those cases.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2016.
AMENDMENT 801
AMENDMENT: Section 2G2.1 is amended in subsection (b)(3) by striking “If the offense
involved distribution” and inserting “If the defendant knowingly engaged in distribu-
tion”;
Amendment 801
140 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
and in subsection (b)(4) by inserting “(A)” before “sadistic or masochistic”, and by in-
serting after “violence” the following: “; or (B) an infant or toddler”.
The Commentary to §2G2.1 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by inserting
at the end the following: “For additional statutory provision(s), see Appendix A (Stat-
utory Index).”.
The Commentary to §2G2.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended by redesignat-
ing Notes 3, 4, 5, and 6 as Notes 5, 6, 7, and 8, respectively, and by inserting after
Note 2 the following new Notes 3 and 4:
“3. Application of Subsection (b)(3).— For purposes of subsection (b)(3), the de-
fendant ‘knowingly engaged in distribution’ if the defendant (A) knowingly
committed the distribution, (B) aided, abetted, counseled, commanded, in-
duced, procured, or willfully caused the distribution, or (C) conspired to dis-
tribute.
4. Interaction of Subsection (b)(4)(B) and Vulnerable Victim (§3A1.1(b)).—If sub-
section (b)(4)(B) applies, do not apply §3A1.1(b).”.
Section 2G2.2 is amended in subsection (b)(3) by striking “If the offense involved”;
in subparagraphs (A), (C), (D), and (E) by striking “Distribution” and inserting “If the
offense involved distribution”;
in subparagraph (B) by striking “Distribution for the receipt, or expectation of receipt,
of a thing of value,” and inserting “If the defendant distributed in exchange for any
valuable consideration,”;
and in subparagraph (F) by striking “Distribution” and inserting “If the defendant
knowingly engaged in distribution,”;
and in subsection (b)(4) by inserting “(A)” before “sadistic or masochistic”, and by in-
serting after “violence” the following: “; or (B) sexual abuse or exploitation of an infant
or toddler”.
The Commentary to §2G2.2 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by inserting
at the end the following: “For additional statutory provision(s), see Appendix A (Stat-
utory Index).”.
The Commentary to §2G2.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking the fourth undesignated paragraph as follows:
“ ‘Distribution for the receipt, or expectation of receipt, of a thing of value, but not for
pecuniary gain’ means any transaction, including bartering or other in-kind transac-
tion, that is conducted for a thing of value, but not for profit. ‘Thing of value’ means
anything of valuable consideration. For example, in a case involving the bartering of
child pornographic material, the ‘thing of value’ is the child pornographic material re-
ceived in exchange for other child pornographic material bartered in consideration for
the material received.”,
and inserting the following:
Amendment 801
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 141
“ ‘The defendant distributed in exchange for any valuable consideration’ means the
defendant agreed to an exchange with another person under which the defendant
knowingly distributed to that other person for the specific purpose of obtaining some-
thing of valuable consideration from that other person, such as other child porno-
graphic material, preferential access to child pornographic material, or access to a
child.”;
by redesignating Notes 2 through 7 as Notes 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9, respectively;
by inserting after Note 1 the following new Note 2:
“2. Application of Subsection (b)(3)(F).— For purposes of subsection (b)(3)(F), the
defendant ‘knowingly engaged in distribution’ if the defendant (A) knowingly
committed the distribution, (B) aided, abetted, counseled, commanded, in-
duced, procured, or willfully caused the distribution, or (C) conspired to dis-
tribute.”;
in Note 3 (as so redesignated) by inserting “(A)” after “(b)(4)” both places such term
appears;
and by inserting after Note 3 (as so redesignated) the following new Note 4:
“4. Interaction of Subsection (b)(4)(B) and Vulnerable Victim (§3A1.1(b)).—If sub-
section (b)(4)(B) applies, do not apply §3A1.1(b).”.
Section 2G3.1 is amended in subsection (b)(1) by striking “If the offense involved”;
in subparagraphs (A), (C), (D), and (E) by striking “Distribution” and inserting “If the
offense involved distribution”;
in subparagraph (B) by striking “Distribution for the receipt, or expectation of receipt,
of a thing of value,” and inserting “If the defendant distributed in exchange for any
valuable consideration,”;
and in subparagraph (F) by striking “Distribution” and inserting “If the defendant
knowingly engaged in distribution,”.
The Commentary to §2G3.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking the fourth undesignated paragraph as follows:
“ ‘Distribution for the receipt, or expectation of receipt, of a thing of value, but not for
pecuniary gain’ means any transaction, including bartering or other in-kind transac-
tion, that is conducted for a thing of value, but not for profit. ‘Thing of value’ means
anything of valuable consideration.”,
and inserting the following:
“ ‘The defendant distributed in exchange for any valuable consideration’ means the
defendant agreed to an exchange with another person under which the defendant
knowingly distributed to that other person for the specific purpose of obtaining some-
thing of valuable consideration from that other person, such as other obscene material,
preferential access to obscene material, or access to a child.”;
by redesignating Notes 2 and 3 as Notes 3 and 4, respectively;
Amendment 801
142 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
and by inserting after Note 1 the following new Note 2:
“2. Application of Subsection (b)(1)(F).— For purposes of subsection (b)(1)(F), the
defendant ‘knowingly engaged in distribution’ if the defendant (A) knowingly
committed the distribution, (B) aided, abetted, counseled, commanded, in-
duced, procured, or willfully caused the distribution, or (C) conspired to dis-
tribute.”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment addresses circuit conflicts and application
issues related to the child pornography guidelines. One issue generally arises under
both the child pornography production guideline and the child pornography distribu-
tion guideline when the offense involves victims who are unusually young and vulner-
able. The other two issues frequently arise when the offense involves a peer-to-peer
file-sharing program or network. These issues were noted by the Commission in
its 2012 report to Congress on child pornography offenses. See United States Sentenc-
ing Commission, “Report to the Congress: Federal Child Pornography Offenses,”
at 33–35 (2012).
Offenses Involving Infants and Toddlers
First, the amendment addresses differences among the circuits when cases involve in-
fant and toddler victims. The production guideline at §2G2.1 (Sexually Exploiting a
Minor by Production of Sexually Explicit Visual or Printed Material; Custodian Per-
mitting Minor to Engage in Sexually Explicit Conduct; Advertisement for Minors to
Engage in Production) provides a 4-level enhancement if the offense involved a minor
who had not attained the age of 12 years and a 2-level enhancement if the minor had
not attained the age of 16 years. See §2G2.1(b)(1)(A)–(B). The non-production guideline
at §2G2.2 (Trafficking in Material Involving the Sexual Exploitation of a Minor; Re-
ceiving, Transporting, Shipping, Soliciting, or Advertising Material Involving the Sex-
ual Exploitation of a Minor; Possessing Material Involving the Sexual Exploitation of
a minor with Intent to Traffic; Possessing Material Involving the Sexual Exploitation
of a Minor) provides a 2-level enhancement if the material involved a prepubescent
minor or a minor who had not attained the age of 12 years. See §2G2.2(b)(2).
A circuit conflict has arisen as to whether a defendant who receives an age enhance-
ment under §§2G2.1 and 2G2.2 may also receive a vulnerable victim adjustment at
§3A1.1 (Hate Crime Motivation or Vulnerable Victim) when the victim is extremely
young and vulnerable, such as an infant or toddler. Section 3A1.1(b)(1) provides for a
2-level increase if the defendant knew or should have known that a victim was a “vul-
nerable victim,” which is defined in the accompanying commentary as a victim “who is
unusually vulnerable due to age, physical or mental condition, or who is otherwise
particularly susceptible to the criminal conduct.” See §3A1.1, comment. (n.2). The com-
mentary also provides that the vulnerable victim adjustment does not apply if the fac-
tor that makes the victim a “vulnerable victim,” such as age, is incorporated in the
offense guidelines, “unless the victim was unusually vulnerable for reasons unrelated
to age.” Id.
The Fifth and Ninth Circuits have held that it is permissible to apply both enhance-
ments in cases involving infant or toddler victims because their level of vulnerability
is not fully incorporated in the offense guidelines. See United States v. Jenkins,
712 F.3d 209, 214 (5th Cir. 2013); United States v. Wright, 373 F.3d 935, 943 (9th Cir.
2004). These circuits have reasoned that although the victim’s small physical size and
extreme vulnerability tend to correlate with age, such characteristics are not the same
Amendment 801
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 143
as compared to most children under 12 years. Jenkins, 712 F.3d at 214; Wright,
373 F.3d at 942–43. The Fourth Circuit, by contrast, has held that the age enhance-
ment and vulnerable victim adjustment may not be simultaneously applied because
the child pornography guidelines fully address age-related factors. See United States
v. Dowell, 771 F.3d 162, 175 (4th Cir. 2014). The Fourth Circuit reasoned that cognitive
development or psychological susceptibility necessarily is related to age. Id.
The amendment resolves the circuit conflict by explicitly accounting for infant and tod-
dler victims in the child pornography guidelines. Specifically, the amendment revises
§§2G2.1 and 2G2.2 by adding a new basis for application of the “sadistic or masochistic”
enhancement when the offense involves infants or toddlers. The amendment amends
§2G2.1(b)(4) to provide for a 4-level increase “if the offense involved material that por-
trays (A) sadistic or masochistic conduct or other depictions of violence; or (B) an infant
or toddler,” and amends §2G2.2(b)(4) to provide a 4-level increase “if the offense in-
volved material that portrays (A) sadistic or masochistic conduct or other depictions of
violence; or (B) sexual abuse or exploitation of an infant or toddler.” The accompanying
application note to each guideline provides that if subsection (b)(4)(B) applies, do not
apply the vulnerable victim adjustment in Chapter Three.
The amendment reflects the Commission’s view, based on testimony and public com-
ment, that child pornography offenses involving infants and toddlers warrant an en-
hancement. Because application of the vulnerable victim adjustment necessarily relies
on a fact-specific inquiry, the Commission determined that expanding the “sadistic or
masochistic” enhancement (§§2G2.1(b)(4) and 2G2.2(b)(4)) to include infant and tod-
dler victims would promote more consistent application of the child pornography guide-
lines and reduce unwarranted sentencing disparities. In making its determination, the
Commission was informed by case law indicating that most circuits have found depic-
tions of the sexual abuse or exploitation of infants or toddlers involving penetration or
pain portray sadistic conduct. See, e.g., United States v. Hoey, 508 F.3d 687, 691
(1st Cir. 2007) (“We agree with the many circuits which have found that images de-
picting the sexual penetration of young and prepubescent children by adult males rep-
resent conduct sufficiently likely to involve pain such as to support a finding that it is
inherently ‘sadistic’ or similarly ‘violent’ . . . .”); United States v. Delmarle, 99 F.3d 80,
83 (2d Cir. 1996) (“[S]ubjection of a young child to a sexual act that would have to be
painful is excessively cruel and hence is sadistic . . . .”); United States v. Maurer,
639 F.3d 72, 79 (3d Cir. 2011) (“[W]e join other circuits in holding that the application
of §2G2.2(b)(4) is appropriate where an image depicts sexual activity involving a pre-
pubescent minor that would have caused pain to the minor.”); United States v. Bur-
gess, 684 F.3d 445, 454 (4th Cir. 2012) (image depicting vaginal penetration of five-
year-old girl by adult male, which would “necessarily cause physical pain to the vic-
tim,” qualified for sentencing enhancement under §2G2.2(b)); United States v. Lyck-
man, 235 F.3d 234, 238–39 (5th Cir. 2000) (agreeing with the Second, Seventh, and
Eleventh Circuits that application of subsection (b)(4) is warranted when the image
depicts “the physical penetration of a young child by an adult male.”); United States v.
Groenendal, 557 F.3d 419, 424–26 (6th Cir. 2009) (penetration of a prepubescent child
by an adult male constitutes inherently sadistic conduct that justifies application of
§2G2.2(b)(4)); United States v. Meyers, 355 F.3d 1040, 1043 (7th Cir. 2004) (finding
vaginal intercourse between a prepubescent girl and an adult male sadistic); United
States v. Belflower, 390 F.3d 560, 562 (8th Cir. 2004) (images involving the anal pen-
etration of minor boy or girl adult male are per se sadistic or violent within the mean-
ing of subsection (b)(4)); United States v. Henderson, 649 F.3d 995 (9th Cir. 2010) (vag-
inal penetration of prepubescent minor qualifies for (b)(4) enhancement); United
States v. Kimler, 335 F.3d 1132, 1143 (10th Cir. 2003) (finding no expert testimony
necessary for a sentence enhancement [(b)(4)] when the images depicted penetration
Amendment 801
144 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
of prepubescent children by adults); United States v. Bender, 290 F.3d 1279, 1286
(11th Cir. 2002) (photograph was sadistic within the meaning of subsection (b)(4) when
it depicts the “subjugation of a young child to a sexual act that would have to be pain-
ful”). The Commission intends the new enhancement to apply to any sexual images of
an infant or toddler.
The Two and Five Level Distribution Enhancements
Next, the amendment addresses differences among the circuits involving application
of the tiered distribution enhancements in §2G2.2. Section 2G2.2(b)(3) provides for an
increase for distribution of child pornographic material ranging from 2 to 7 levels de-
pending on certain factors. See §2G2.2(b)(3)(A)–(F). The circuits have reached different
conclusions regarding the mental state required for application of the 2-level enhance-
ment for “generic” distribution as compared to the 5-level enhancement for distribution
not for pecuniary gain. The circuit conflicts involving these two enhancements have
arisen frequently, although not exclusively, in cases involving the use of peer-to-peer
file-sharing programs or networks.
Peer-to-Peer File-Sharing Programs
The Commission’s 2012 report to Congress discussed the use of file-sharing programs,
such as Peer-to-Peer (“P2P”), in the context of cases involving distribution of child por-
nography. See 2012 Report at 33–35, 48–62. Specifically, P2P is a software application
that enables computer users to share files easily over the Internet. These applications
do not require a central server or use of email. Rather, the file-sharing application
allows two or more users to essentially have access each other’s computers and to di-
rectly swap files from their computers. Some file-sharing programs require a user to
designate files to be shared during the installation process, meaning that at the time
of installation the user can “opt in” to share files, and the software will automatically
scan the user’s computer and then compile a list of files to share. Other programs em-
ploy a default file-sharing setting, meaning the user can “opt out” of automatically
sharing files by changing the default setting to limit which, if any, files are available
for sharing. Once the user has downloaded and set up the file-sharing software, the
user can begin searching for files shared on the connected network using search key-
words in the same way one regularly uses a search engine such as Google. Users may
choose to “opt in” for a variety of reasons, including, for example, to obtain faster down-
load speeds, to have access to a greater range of material, or because the particular
site mandates sharing.
The 2-Level Distribution Enhancement
The circuits have reached different conclusions regarding whether application of the
2-level distribution enhancement at §2G2.2(b)(3)(F) requires a mental state (mens
rea), particularly in cases involving use of a file-sharing program or network. The Fifth,
Tenth, and Eleventh Circuits have held that the 2-level distribution enhancement ap-
plies if the defendant used a file-sharing program, regardless of whether the defendant
did so purposefully, knowingly, or negligently. See, e.g., United States v. Baker,
742 F.3d 618, 621 (5th Cir. 2014); United States v. Ray, 704 F.3d 1307, 1312 (10th Cir.
2013); United States v. Creel, 783 F.3d 1357, 1360 (11th Cir. 2015). The Second,
Fourth, and Seventh Circuits have held that the 2-level distribution enhancement re-
quires a showing that the defendant knew of the file-sharing properties of the program.
See, e.g., United States v. Baldwin, 743 F.3d 357, 361 (2d Cir. 2015) (requiring
knowledge); United States v. Robinson, 714 F.3d 466, 468 (7th Cir. 2013) (knowledge);
Amendment 801
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 145
United States v. Layton, 564 F.3d 330, 335 (4th Cir. 2009) (knowledge or reckless dis-
regard). The Eighth Circuit has held that knowledge is required, but knowledge may
be inferred from the fact that a file-sharing program was used, absent “concrete evi-
dence” of ignorance. See United States v. Dodd, 598 F.3d 449, 452 (8th Cir. 2010). The
Sixth Circuit has held that there is a “presumption” that “users of file-sharing software
understand others can access their files.” United States v. Conner, 521 Fed. App’x 493,
499 (6th Cir. 2013); see also United States v. Abbring, 788 F.3d 565, 567 (6th Cir. 2015)
(“the whole point of a file-sharing program is to share, sharing creates a transfer, and
transferring equals distribution”).
The amendment generally adopts the approach of the Second, Fourth, and Seventh
Circuits. It amends §2G2.2(b)(3)(F) to provide that the 2-level distribution enhance-
ment applies if “the defendant knowingly engaged in distribution.” Based on testi-
mony, public comment, and data analysis, the Commission determined that the 2-level
distribution enhancement is appropriate only in cases in which the defendant know-
ingly engaged in distribution. An accompanying application note clarifies that: “For
purposes of subsection (b)(3)(F), the defendant ‘knowingly engaged in distribution’ if
the defendant (A) knowingly committed the distribution, (B) aided, abetted, counseled,
commanded, induced, procured, or willfully caused the distribution, or (C) conspired to
distribute.” Similar changes are made to the 2-level distribution enhancement at
§2G2.1(b)(3) and the obscenity guideline, §2G3.1 (Importing, Mailing, or Transporting
Obscene Matter; Transferring Obscene Matter to a Minor; Misleading Domain Names),
which contains a similarly tiered distribution enhancement.
The 5-Level Distribution Enhancement
Finally, the amendment responds to differences among the circuits in applying the 5-
level enhancement for distribution not for pecuniary gain at §2G2.2(b)(3)(B). While
courts generally agree that mere use of a file-sharing program or network, without
more, is insufficient for application of the 5-level distribution enhancement, the cir-
cuits have taken distinct approaches with respect to the circumstances under which
the 5-level rather than the 2-level enhancement is appropriate in such circumstances.
The Fourth Circuit has held that the 5-level distribution enhancement applies when
the defendant (1) “knowingly made child pornography in his possession available to
others by some means”; and (2) did so “for the specific purpose of obtaining something
of valuable consideration, such as more pornography.” United States v. McManus,
734 F.3d 315, 319 (4th Cir. 2013). In contrast, while holding that the 5-level enhance-
ment applies when the defendant knew he was distributing child pornographic mate-
rial in exchange for a thing of value, the Fifth Circuit has indicated that when the
defendant knowingly uses file-sharing software, the requirements for the 5-level en-
hancement are generally satisfied. See United States v. Groce, 784 F.3d 291, 294
(5th Cir. 2015).
The amendment revises §2G2.2(b)(3)(B) and commentary to clarify that the 5-level en-
hancement applies “if the defendant distributed in exchange for any valuable consid-
eration.” The amendment further explains in the accompanying application note that
this means “the defendant agreed to an exchange with another person under which the
defendant knowingly distributed to that other person for the specific purpose of obtain-
ing something of valuable consideration from that other person, such as other child
pornographic material, preferential access to child pornographic material, or access to
a child.” The amendment makes parallel changes to the obscenity guideline at §2G3.1,
which has a similar tiered distribution enhancement.
Amendment 802
146 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
As with the 2-level distribution enhancement, the amendment resolves differences
among the circuits in applying the 5-level distribution enhancement by clarifying the
mental state required for distribution of child pornographic material for non-pecuniary
gain, particularly when the case involves a file-sharing program or network. The Com-
mission determined that the amendment is an appropriate way to account for the
higher level of culpability when the defendant had the specific purpose of distributing
child pornographic material to another person in exchange for valuable consideration.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2016.
AMENDMENT 802
Amendment: Section 2L1.1 is amended in subsection (b)(4) by striking the following:
“If the defendant smuggled, transported, or harbored a minor who was unaccompanied
by the minor’s parent or grandparent, increase by 2 levels.”,
and inserting the following:
“If the offense involved the smuggling, transporting, or harboring of a minor who was
unaccompanied by the minor’s parent, adult relative, or legal guardian, increase by
4 levels.”.
The Commentary to §2L1.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking the third undesignated paragraph as follows:
“ ‘Aggravated felony’ is defined in the Commentary to §2L1.2 (Unlawfully Entering or
Remaining in the United States).”,
and inserting the following:
“ ‘Aggravated felony’ has the meaning given that term in section 101(a)(43) of the Im-
migration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(43)), without regard to the date of
conviction for the aggravated felony.”;
in the paragraph that begins “ ‘Minor’ means” by striking “16 years” and inserting
“18 years”;
and by inserting after the paragraph that begins “ ‘Parent’ means” the following new
paragraph:
“ ‘Bodily injury,’ ‘serious bodily injury,’ and ‘permanent or life-threatening bodily in-
jury’ have the meaning given those terms in the Commentary to §1B1.1 (Application
Instructions).”;
by renumbering Notes 2 through 6 according to the following table:
Before Amendment After Amendment
4 2
5 3
6 5
2 6
Amendment 802
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 147
3 7
and by rearranging those Notes, as so renumbered, to place them in proper order;
and by inserting after Note 3 (as so renumbered) the following new Note 4:
“4. Application of Subsection (b)(7) to Conduct Constituting Criminal Sexual
Abuse.—Consistent with Application Note 1(L) of §1B1.1 (Application Instruc-
tions), ‘serious bodily injury’ is deemed to have occurred if the offense involved
conduct constituting criminal sexual abuse under 18 U.S.C. § 2241 or § 2242
or any similar offense under state law.”.
Section 2L1.2 is amended by striking subsections (a) and (b) as follows:
“ (a) Base Offense Level: 8
(b) Specific Offense Characteristic
(1) Apply the Greatest:
If the defendant previously was deported, or unlawfully re-
mained in the United States, after—
(A) a conviction for a felony that is (i) a drug trafficking
offense for which the sentence imposed exceeded
13 months; (ii) a crime of violence; (iii) a firearms of-
fense; (iv) a child pornography offense; (v) a national
security or terrorism offense; (vi) a human trafficking
offense; or (vii) an alien smuggling offense, increase by
16 levels if the conviction receives criminal history
points under Chapter Four or by 12 levels if the convic-
tion does not receive criminal history points;
(B) a conviction for a felony drug trafficking offense for
which the sentence imposed was 13 months or less, in-
crease by 12 levels if the conviction receives criminal
history points under Chapter Four or by 8 levels if the
conviction does not receive criminal history points;
(C) a conviction for an aggravated felony, increase by 8 lev-
els;
(D) a conviction for any other felony, increase by 4 levels; or
(E) three or more convictions for misdemeanors that are
crimes of violence or drug trafficking offenses, increase
by 4 levels.”,
and inserting the following:
“ (a) Base Offense Level: 8
(b) Specific Offense Characteristics
Amendment 802
148 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
(1) (Apply the Greater) If the defendant committed the instant of-
fense after sustaining—
(A) a conviction for a felony that is an illegal reentry of-
fense, increase by 4 levels; or
(B) two or more convictions for misdemeanors under
8 U.S.C. § 1325(a), increase by 2 levels.
(2) (Apply the Greatest) If, before the defendant was ordered de-
ported or ordered removed from the United States for the first
time, the defendant sustained—
(A) a conviction for a felony offense (other than an illegal
reentry offense) for which the sentence imposed was
five years or more, increase by 10 levels;
(B) a conviction for a felony offense (other than an illegal
reentry offense) for which the sentence imposed was
two years or more, increase by 8 levels;
(C) a conviction for a felony offense (other than an illegal
reentry offense) for which the sentence imposed ex-
ceeded one year and one month, increase by 6 levels;
(D) a conviction for any other felony offense (other than an
illegal reentry offense), increase by 4 levels; or
(E) three or more convictions for misdemeanors that are
crimes of violence or drug trafficking offenses, increase
by 2 levels.
(3) (Apply the Greatest) If, at any time after the defendant was
ordered deported or ordered removed from the United States
for the first time, the defendant engaged in criminal conduct
resulting in—
(A) a conviction for a felony offense (other than an illegal
reentry offense) for which the sentence imposed was
five years or more, increase by 10 levels;
(B) a conviction for a felony offense (other than an illegal
reentry offense) for which the sentence imposed was
two years or more, increase by 8 levels;
(C) a conviction for a felony offense (other than an illegal
reentry offense) for which the sentence imposed ex-
ceeded one year and one month, increase by 6 levels;
(D) a conviction for any other felony offense (other than an
illegal reentry offense), increase by 4 levels; or
Amendment 802
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 149
(E) three or more convictions for misdemeanors that are
crimes of violence or drug trafficking offenses, increase
by 2 levels.”.
The Commentary to §2L1.2 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by striking
“8 U.S.C. § 1325(a) (second or subsequent offense only), 8 U.S.C. § 1326” and inserting
“8 U.S.C. § 1253, § 1325(a) (second or subsequent offense only), § 1326”.
The Commentary to §2L1.2 captioned “Application Notes” is amended by striking
Notes 1 through 7 as follows:
“1. Application of Subsection (b)(1).—
(A) In General.—For purposes of subsection (b)(1):
(i) A defendant shall be considered to be deported after a convic-
tion if the defendant has been removed or has departed the
United States while an order of exclusion, deportation, or re-
moval was outstanding.
(ii) A defendant shall be considered to be deported after a convic-
tion if the deportation was subsequent to the conviction, re-
gardless of whether the deportation was in response to the con-
viction.
(iii) A defendant shall be considered to have unlawfully remained
in the United States if the defendant remained in the United
States following a removal order issued after a conviction, re-
gardless of whether the removal order was in response to the
conviction.
(iv) Subsection (b)(1) does not apply to a conviction for an offense
committed before the defendant was eighteen years of age un-
less such conviction is classified as an adult conviction under
the laws of the jurisdiction in which the defendant was con-
victed.
(B) Definitions.—For purposes of subsection (b)(1):
(i) ‘Alien smuggling offense’ has the meaning given that term in
section 101(a)(43)(N) of the Immigration and Nationality Act
(8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(43)(N)).
(ii) ‘Child pornography offense’ means (I) an offense described in
18 U.S.C. § 2251, § 2251A, § 2252, § 2252A, or § 2260; or (II) an
offense under state or local law consisting of conduct that
would have been an offense under any such section if the of-
fense had occurred within the special maritime and territorial
jurisdiction of the United States.
(iii) ‘Crime of violence’ means any of the following offenses under
federal, state, or local law: murder, manslaughter, kidnapping,
aggravated assault, forcible sex offenses (including where con-
sent to the conduct is not given or is not legally valid, such as
Amendment 802
150 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
where consent to the conduct is involuntary, incompetent, or
coerced), statutory rape, sexual abuse of a minor, robbery, ar-
son, extortion, extortionate extension of credit, burglary of a
dwelling, or any other offense under federal, state, or local law
that has as an element the use, attempted use, or threatened
use of physical force against the person of another.
(iv) ‘Drug trafficking offense’ means an offense under federal, state,
or local law that prohibits the manufacture, import, export, dis-
tribution, or dispensing of, or offer to sell a controlled substance
(or a counterfeit substance) or the possession of a controlled
substance (or a counterfeit substance) with intent to manufac-
ture, import, export, distribute, or dispense.
(v) ‘Firearms offense’ means any of the following:
(I) An offense under federal, state, or local law that pro-
hibits the importation, distribution, transportation, or
trafficking of a firearm described in 18 U.S.C. § 921, or
of an explosive material as defined in 18 U.S.C.
§ 841(c).
(II) An offense under federal, state, or local law that pro-
hibits the possession of a firearm described in 26 U.S.C.
§ 5845(a), or of an explosive material as defined in
18 U.S.C. § 841(c).
(III) A violation of 18 U.S.C. § 844(h).
(IV) A violation of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c).
(V) A violation of 18 U.S.C. § 929(a).
(VI) An offense under state or local law consisting of con-
duct that would have been an offense under subdivi-
sion (III), (IV), or (V) if the offense had occurred within
the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the
United States.
(vi) ‘Human trafficking offense’ means (I) any offense described in
18 U.S.C. § 1581, § 1582, § 1583, § 1584, § 1585, § 1588,
§ 1589, § 1590, or § 1591; or (II) an offense under state or local
law consisting of conduct that would have been an offense un-
der any such section if the offense had occurred within the spe-
cial maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States.
(vii) ‘Sentence imposed’ has the meaning given the term ‘sentence
of imprisonment’ in Application Note 2 and subsection (b) of
§4A1.2 (Definitions and Instructions for Computing Criminal
History), without regard to the date of the conviction. The
length of the sentence imposed includes any term of imprison-
ment given upon revocation of probation, parole, or supervised
release, but only if the revocation occurred before the defend-
ant was deported or unlawfully remained in the United States.
Amendment 802
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 151
(viii) ‘Terrorism offense’ means any offense involving, or intending
to promote, a ‘Federal crime of terrorism’, as that term is de-
fined in 18 U.S.C. § 2332b(g)(5).
(C) Prior Convictions.—In determining the amount of an enhancement un-
der subsection (b)(1), note that the levels in subsections (b)(1)(A)
and (B) depend on whether the conviction receives criminal history
points under Chapter Four (Criminal History and Criminal Liveli-
hood), while subsections (b)(1)(C), (D), and (E) apply without regard to
whether the conviction receives criminal history points.
2. Definition of ‘Felony’.—For purposes of subsection (b)(1)(A), (B), and (D), ‘fel-
ony’ means any federal, state, or local offense punishable by imprisonment for
a term exceeding one year.
3. Application of Subsection (b)(1)(C).—
(A) Definitions.—For purposes of subsection (b)(1)(C), ‘aggravated felony’
has the meaning given that term in section 101(a)(43) of the Immigra-
tion and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(43)), without regard to the
date of conviction for the aggravated felony.
(B) In General.—The offense level shall be increased under subsec-
tion (b)(1)(C) for any aggravated felony (as defined in subdivision (A)),
with respect to which the offense level is not increased under subsec-
tions (b)(1)(A) or (B).
4. Application of Subsection (b)(1)(E).—For purposes of subsection (b)(1)(E):
(A) ‘Misdemeanor’ means any federal, state, or local offense punishable by
a term of imprisonment of one year or less.
(B) ‘Three or more convictions’ means at least three convictions for offenses
that are not treated as a single sentence pursuant to subsection (a)(2)
of §4A1.2 (Definitions and Instructions for Computing Criminal His-
tory).
5. Aiding and Abetting, Conspiracies, and Attempts.—Prior convictions of of-
fenses counted under subsection (b)(1) include the offenses of aiding and abet-
ting, conspiring, and attempting, to commit such offenses.
6. Computation of Criminal History Points.—A conviction taken into account un-
der subsection (b)(1) is not excluded from consideration of whether that convic-
tion receives criminal history points pursuant to Chapter Four, Part A (Crim-
inal History).
7. Departure Based on Seriousness of a Prior Conviction.—There may be cases in
which the applicable offense level substantially overstates or understates the
seriousness of a prior conviction. In such a case, a departure may be warranted.
Examples: (A) In a case in which subsection (b)(1)(A) or (b)(1)(B) does not apply
and the defendant has a prior conviction for possessing or transporting a quan-
tity of a controlled substance that exceeds a quantity consistent with personal
use, an upward departure may be warranted. (B) In a case in which the 12-
Amendment 802
152 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
level enhancement under subsection (b)(1)(A) or the 8-level enhancement in
subsection (b)(1)(B) applies but that enhancement does not adequately reflect
the extent or seriousness of the conduct underlying the prior conviction, an
upward departure may be warranted. (C) In a case in which subsec-
tion (b)(1)(A) applies, and the prior conviction does not meet the definition of
aggravated felony at 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(43), a downward departure may be
warranted.”;
by redesignating Notes 8 and 9 as Notes 6 and 7, respectively, and inserting before
Note 6 (as so redesignated) the following new Notes 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5:
“1. In General.—
(A) ‘Ordered Deported or Ordered Removed from the United States for the
First Time’.—For purposes of this guideline, a defendant shall be con-
sidered ‘ordered deported or ordered removed from the United States’
if the defendant was ordered deported or ordered removed from the
United States based on a final order of exclusion, deportation, or re-
moval, regardless of whether the order was in response to a conviction.
‘For the first time’ refers to the first time the defendant was ever the
subject of such an order.
(B) Offenses Committed Prior to Age Eighteen.—Subsections (b)(1), (b)(2),
and (b)(3) do not apply to a conviction for an offense committed before
the defendant was eighteen years of age unless such conviction is clas-
sified as an adult conviction under the laws of the jurisdiction in which
the defendant was convicted.
2. Definitions.—For purposes of this guideline:
‘Crime of violence’ means any of the following offenses under federal, state, or
local law: murder, voluntary manslaughter, kidnapping, aggravated assault, a
forcible sex offense, robbery, arson, extortion, the use or unlawful possession
of a firearm described in 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a) or explosive material as defined
in 18 U.S.C. § 841(c), or any other offense under federal, state, or local law that
has as an element the use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical force
against the person of another. ‘Forcible sex offense’ includes where consent to
the conduct is not given or is not legally valid, such as where consent to the
conduct is involuntary, incompetent, or coerced. The offenses of sexual abuse
of a minor and statutory rape are included only if the sexual abuse of a minor
or statutory rape was (A) an offense described in 18 U.S.C. § 2241(c) or (B) an
offense under state law that would have been an offense under section 2241(c)
if the offense had occurred within the special maritime and territorial jurisdic-
tion of the United States. ‘Extortion’ is obtaining something of value from an-
other by the wrongful use of (A) force, (B) fear of physical injury, or (C) threat
of physical injury.
‘Drug trafficking offense’ means an offense under federal, state, or local law
that prohibits the manufacture, import, export, distribution, or dispensing of,
or offer to sell a controlled substance (or a counterfeit substance) or the posses-
sion of a controlled substance (or a counterfeit substance) with intent to man-
ufacture, import, export, distribute, or dispense.
Amendment 802
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 153
‘Felony’ means any federal, state, or local offense punishable by imprisonment
for a term exceeding one year.
‘Illegal reentry offense’ means (A) an offense under 8 U.S.C. § 1253 or § 1326,
or (B) a second or subsequent offense under 8 U.S.C. § 1325(a).
‘Misdemeanor’ means any federal, state, or local offense punishable by a term
of imprisonment of one year or less.
‘Sentence imposed’ has the meaning given the term ‘sentence of imprisonment’
in Application Note 2 and subsection (b) of §4A1.2 (Definitions and Instructions
for Computing Criminal History). The length of the sentence imposed includes
any term of imprisonment given upon revocation of probation, parole, or super-
vised release.
3. Criminal History Points.—For purposes of applying subsections (b)(1), (b)(2),
and (b)(3), use only those convictions that receive criminal history points under
§4A1.1(a), (b), or (c). In addition, for purposes of subsections (b)(1)(B), (b)(2)(E),
and (b)(3)(E), use only those convictions that are counted separately under
§4A1.2(a)(2).
A conviction taken into account under subsection (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) is not
excluded from consideration of whether that conviction receives criminal his-
tory points pursuant to Chapter Four, Part A (Criminal History).
4. Cases in Which Sentences for An Illegal Reentry Offense and Another Felony
Offense were Imposed at the Same Time.—There may be cases in which the
sentences for an illegal reentry offense and another felony offense were im-
posed at the same time and treated as a single sentence for purposes of calcu-
lating the criminal history score under §4A1.1(a), (b), and (c). In such a case,
use the illegal reentry offense in determining the appropriate enhancement
under subsection (b)(1), if it independently would have received criminal his-
tory points. In addition, use the prior sentence for the other felony offense in
determining the appropriate enhancement under subsection (b)(3), if it inde-
pendently would have received criminal history points.
5. Departure Based on Seriousness of a Prior Offense.—There may be cases in
which the offense level provided by an enhancement in subsection (b)(2)
or (b)(3) substantially understates or overstates the seriousness of the conduct
underlying the prior offense, because (A) the length of the sentence imposed
does not reflect the seriousness of the prior offense; (B) the prior conviction is
too remote to receive criminal history points (see §4A1.2(e)); or (C) the time
actually served was substantially less than the length of the sentence imposed
for the prior offense. In such a case, a departure may be warranted.”.
The Commentary to §5G1.3 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 2(B) by
striking “an aggravated felony” and inserting “a prior conviction”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This multi-part amendment is a result of the Commission’s
multi-year study of immigration offenses and related guidelines, and reflects extensive
data collection and analysis relating to immigration offenses and offenders. Based on
this data, legal analysis, and public comment, the Commission identified a number of
specific areas where changes were appropriate. The first part of this amendment
makes several discrete changes to the alien smuggling guideline, §2L1.1 (Smuggling,
Amendment 802
154 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Transporting, or Harboring an Unlawful Alien), while the second part significantly
revises the illegal reentry guideline, §2L1.2 (Unlawfully Entering or Remaining in the
United States).
Alien Smuggling
The first part of the amendment amends the alien smuggling guideline (§2L1.1).
A 2014 letter from the Deputy Attorney General asked the Commission to examine
several aspects of this guideline in light of changing circumstances surrounding the
commission of these offenses. See Letter from James M. Cole to Hon. Patti B. Saris
(Oct. 9, 2014). In response, the Commission undertook a data analysis that, in conjunc-
tion with additional public comment, suggested two primary areas for change in the
guideline.
Unaccompanied Minors
The specific offense characteristic at §2L1.1(b)(4) provides an enhancement “[i]f the
defendant smuggled, transported, or harbored a minor who was unaccompanied by the
minor’s parent or grandparent.” The amendment makes several changes to this en-
hancement.
First, the amendment increases the enhancement at subsection (b)(4) from 2 levels to
4 levels, and broadens its scope to offense-based rather than defendant-based. These
two changes were made in light of data, testimony, and public comment indicating
that: (1) in recent years there has been a significant increase in the number of unac-
companied minors smuggled into the United States; (2) unaccompanied minors being
smuggled are often exposed to deprivation and physical danger (including sexual
abuse); (3) the smuggling of unaccompanied minors places a particularly severe burden
on public resources when they are taken into custody; and (4) alien smuggling is typi-
cally conducted by multimember commercial enterprises that accept smuggling victims
without regard to their age, such that an individual defendant is likely to be aware of
the risk that unaccompanied minors are being smuggled as part of the offense.
Second, the amendment narrows the scope of the enhancement at subsection (b)(4) by
revising the meaning of an “unaccompanied” minor. Prior to the amendment, the en-
hancement did not apply if the minor was accompanied by the minor’s parent or grand-
parent. The amendment narrows the class of offenders who would receive the enhance-
ment by specifying that the enhancement does not apply if the minor was accompanied
by the minor’s “parent, adult relative, or legal guardian.” This change reflects the view
that minors who are accompanied by a parent or another responsible adult relative or
legal guardian ordinarily are not subject to the same level of risk as minors unaccom-
panied by such adults.
Third, the amendment expands the definition of “minor” in the guideline, as it relates
to the enhancement in subsection (b)(4), to include an individual under the age of 18.
The guideline currently defines “minor” to include only individuals under 16 years of
age. The Commission determined that an expanded definition of minor that includes
16- and 17-year-olds is consistent with other aspects of federal immigration law, in-
cluding the statute assigning responsibility for unaccompanied minors under age 18 to
the Department of Health and Human Services. See 6 U.S.C. § 279(g)(2)(B). The Com-
mission also believed that it was appropriate to conform the definition of minor in the
alien smuggling guideline to the definition of minor in §3B1.4 (Using a Minor to Com-
mit a Crime).
Amendment 802
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 155
Clarification of the Enhancement Applicable to Sexual Abuse of Aliens
The amendment addresses offenses in which an alien (whether or not a minor) is sex-
ually abused. Specifically, it ensures that a “serious bodily injury” enhancement of
4 levels will apply in such a case. It achieves this by amending the commentary to
§2L1.1 to clarify that the term “serious bodily injury” included in subsection (b)(7)(B)
has the meaning given that term in the commentary to §1B1.1 (Application Instruc-
tions). That instruction states that “serious bodily injury” is deemed to have occurred
if the offense involved conduct constituting criminal sexual abuse under 18 U.S.C.
§ 2241 or § 2242 or any similar offense under state law.
The Commission’s data indicated that the (b)(7)(B) enhancement has not been applied
in some cases in which a smuggled alien had been sexually assaulted. The Commission
determined that this clarification is warranted to ensure that the 4-level enhancement
is consistently applied when the offense involves the sexual abuse of an alien.
Illegal Reentry
The second part of the amendment is the product of the Commission’s multi-year study
of the illegal reentry guideline. In considering this amendment, the Commission was
informed by the Commission’s 2015 report, Illegal Reentry Offenses; its previous con-
sideration of the “categorical approach” in the context of the definition of “crimes of
violence”; and extensive public testimony and public comment, in particular from
judges from the southwest border districts where the majority of illegal reentry prose-
cutions occur.
The amendment responds to three primary concerns. First, the Commission has re-
ceived significant comment over several years from courts and stakeholders that the
“categorical approach” used to determine the particular level of enhancement under
the existing guideline is overly complex and resource-intensive and often leads to liti-
gation and uncertainty. The existing guideline’s single specific offense characteristic
provides for enhancements of between 4 levels and 16 levels, based on the nature of a
defendant’s most serious conviction that occurred before the defendant was “deported”
or “unlawfully remained in the United States.” Determining whether a predicate con-
viction qualifies for a particular level of enhancement requires application of the cate-
gorical approach to the penal statute underlying the prior conviction. See generally
United States v. Taylor, 495 U.S. 575 (1990) (establishing the categorical approach).
Instead of the categorical approach, the amendment adopts a much simpler sentence-
imposed model for determining the applicability of predicate convictions. The level of
the sentencing enhancement for a prior conviction generally will be determined by the
length of the sentence imposed for the prior offense, not by the type of offense for which
the defendant had been convicted. The definition of “sentence imposed” is the same
definition that appears in Chapter Four of the Guidelines Manual.
Second, comment received by the Commission and sentencing data indicated that the
existing 16- and 12-level enhancements for certain prior felonies committed before a
defendant’s deportation were overly severe. In fiscal year 2015, only 29.7 percent of
defendants who received the 16-level enhancement were sentenced within the applica-
ble sentencing guideline range, and only 32.4 percent of defendants who received the
12-level enhancement were sentenced within the applicable sentencing guideline
range.
Third, the Commission’s research identified a concern that the existing guideline did
not account for other types of criminal conduct committed by illegal reentry offenders.
Amendment 802
156 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
The Commission’s 2015 report found that 48.0 percent of illegal reentry offenders were
convicted of at least one offense (other than their instant illegal reentry conviction)
after their first deportations.
The amendment addresses these concerns by accounting for prior criminal conduct in
a broader and more proportionate manner. The amendment reduces somewhat the
level of enhancements for criminal conduct occurring before the defendant’s first order
of deportation and adds a new enhancement for criminal conduct occurring after the
defendant’s first order of deportation. It also responds to concerns that prior convic-
tions for illegal reentry offenses may not be adequately accounted for in the existing
guideline by adding an enhancement for prior illegal reentry and multiple prior illegal
entry convictions.
The manner in which the amendment responds to each of these concerns is discussed
in more detail below.
Accounting for Prior Illegal Reentry Offenses
The amendment provides at subsection (b)(1) a new tiered enhancement based on prior
convictions for illegal reentry offenses under 8 U.S.C. § 1253, § 1325(a), or § 1326. A
defendant who has one or more felony illegal reentry convictions will receive an in-
crease of 4 levels. “Illegal reentry offense” is defined in the commentary to include all
convictions under 8 U.S.C. §§ 1253 (failure to depart after an order of removal)
and 1326 (illegal reentry), as well as second or subsequent illegal entry convictions
under § 1325(a). A defendant who has two or more misdemeanor illegal entry convic-
tions under 8 U.S.C. § 1325(a) will receive an increase of 2 levels.
The Commission’s data indicates that the extent of a defendant’s history of illegal
reentry convictions is associated with the number of his or her prior deportations or
removals from the United States, with the average illegal reentry defendant having
been removed from the United States 3.2 times. Illegal Reentry Offenses, at 14. Over
one-third (38.1%) of the defendants were previously deported after an illegal entry or
reentry conviction. Id. at 15. The Commission determined that a defendant’s demon-
strated history of violating §§ 1325(a) and 1326 is appropriately accounted for in a
separate enhancement. Because defendants with second or successive § 1325(a) con-
victions (whether they were charged as felonies or misdemeanors) have entered ille-
gally more than once, the Commission determined that this conduct is appropriately
accounted for under this enhancement.
For a defendant with a conviction under § 1326, or a felony conviction under § 1325(a),
the 4-level enhancement in the new subsection (b)(1)(A) is identical in magnitude to
the enhancement the defendant would receive under the existing subsection (b)(1)(D).
The Commission concluded that an enhancement is also appropriate for defendants
previously convicted of two or more misdemeanor offenses under § 1325(a).
Accounting for Other Prior Convictions
Subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of the amended guideline account for convictions (other
than illegal entry or reentry convictions) primarily through a sentence-imposed ap-
proach, which is similar to how Chapter Four of the Guidelines Manual determines a
defendant’s criminal history score based on his or her prior convictions. The two sub-
sections are intended to divide the defendant’s criminal history into two time periods.
Subsection (b)(2) reflects the convictions, if any, that the defendant sustained before
Amendment 802
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 157
being ordered deported or removed from the United States for the first time. Subsec-
tion (b)(3) reflects the convictions, if any, that the defendant sustained after that event
(but only if the criminal conduct that resulted in the conviction took place after that
event).
The specific offense characteristics at subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) each contain a par-
allel set of enhancements of:
 10 levels for a prior felony conviction that received a sentence of imprison-
ment of five years or more;
 8 levels for a prior felony conviction that received a sentence of two years or
more;
 6 levels for a prior felony conviction that received a sentence exceeding one
year and one month;
 4 levels for any other prior felony conviction
 2 levels for three or more convictions for misdemeanors that are crimes of vio-
lence or drug trafficking offenses.
The (b)(2) and (b)(3) specific offense characteristics are to be calculated separately, but
within each specific offense characteristic, a defendant may receive only the single
greatest applicable increase.
The Commission determined that the new specific offense characteristics more appro-
priately provide for incremental punishment to reflect the varying levels of culpability
and risk of recidivism reflected in illegal reentry defendants’ prior convictions. The
(b)(2) specific offense characteristic reflects the same general rationale as the illegal
reentry statute’s increased statutory maximum penalties for offenders with certain
types of serious pre-deportation predicate offenses (in particular, “aggravated felonies”
and “felonies”). See 8 U.S.C. § 1326(b)(1) and (b)(2). The Commission’s data analysis of
offenders’ prior felony convictions showed that the more serious types of offenses, such
as drug-trafficking offenses, crimes of violence, and sex offenses, tended to receive sen-
tences of imprisonment of two years or more, while the less serious felony offenses,
such as felony theft or drug possession, tended to receive much shorter sentences. The
sentence-length benchmarks in (b)(2) are based on this data.
The (b)(3) specific offense characteristic focuses on post-reentry criminal conduct
which, if it occurred after a defendant’s most recent illegal reentry, would receive no
enhancement under the existing guideline. The Commission concluded that a defend-
ant who sustains criminal convictions occurring before and after the defendant’s first
order of deportation warrants separate sentencing enhancement.
The Commission concluded that the length of sentence imposed by a sentencing court
is a strong indicator of the court’s assessment of the seriousness of the predicate offense
at the time, and this approach is consistent with how criminal history is generally
scored in the Chapter Four of the Guidelines Manual. In amending the guideline, the
Commission also took into consideration public testimony and comment indicating that
tiered enhancements based on the length of the sentence imposed, rather than the
classification of a prior offense under the categorical approach, would greatly simplify
application of the guideline. With respect an offender’s prior felony convictions, the
amendment eliminates the use of the categorical approach, which has been criticized
as cumbersome and overly legalistic.
Amendment 802
158 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
The amendment retains the use of the categorical approach for predicate misdemeanor
convictions in the new subsections (b)(2)(E) and (b)(3)(E) in view of a congressional
directive requiring inclusion of an enhancement for certain types of misdemeanor of-
fenses. See Illegal Immigration and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996, Pub.
L. 104–208, § 344, 110 Stat. 3009.
The amendment also addresses another frequent criticism of the existing guideline –
that its use of a single predicate conviction sustained by a defendant before being de-
ported or removed from the United States to impose an enhancement of up to 16 levels
is often disproportionate to a defendant’s culpability or recidivism risk. The Commis-
sion’s data shows an unusually high rate of downward variances and departures from
the guideline for such defendants. For example, the Commission’s report found that
less than one-third of defendants who qualify for a 16-level enhancement have received
a within-range sentence, while 92.7 percent of defendants who currently qualify for no
enhancement receive a within-range sentence. Illegal Reentry Report, at 11.
The lengths of the terms of imprisonment triggering each level of enhancement were
set based on Commission data showing differing median sentence lengths for a variety
of predicate offense categories. For example, the Commission’s data indicated that sen-
tences for more serious predicate offenses, such as drug-trafficking and felony assault,
exceeded the two- and five-year benchmarks far more frequently than did sentences
for less serious felony offenses, such as drug possession and theft. With respect to drug-
trafficking offenses, the Commission found that 34.6 percent of such offenses received
sentences of between two and five years, and 17.0 percent of such offenses received
sentences of five years or more. With respect to felony assault offenses, the Commission
found that 42.1 percent of such offenses received sentences of between two and five
years, and 9.0 percent of such offenses received sentences of five years or more. With
respect to felony drug possession offenses, 67.7 percent of such offenses received sen-
tences of 13 months or less, while only 21.3 percent received sentences between two
years and five years and only 3.0 percent received sentences of five years or more. With
respect to felony theft offenses, 57.1 percent of such offenses received sentences of
13 months or less, while only 17.4 percent received sentences between two years and
five years and only 2.0 percent received sentences of five years or more.
The Commission considered public comment suggesting that the term of imprisonment
a defendant actually served for a prior conviction was a superior means of assessing
the seriousness of the prior offense. The Commission determined that such an ap-
proach would be administratively impractical due to difficulties in obtaining accurate
documentation. The Commission determined that a sentence-imposed approach is con-
sistent with the Chapter Four criminal history rules, easily applied, and appropriately
calibrated to account for the seriousness of prior offenses.
Departure Provision
The amendment adds a new departure provision, at Application Note 5, applicable to
situations where “an enhancement in subsection (b)(2) or (b)(3) substantially under-
states or overstates the seriousness of the conduct underlying the prior offense.” This
departure accounts for three situations in which an enhancement based on the length
of a prior imposed sentence appears either inadequate or excessive in light of the de-
fendant’s underlying conduct. For example, if a prior serious conviction (e.g., murder)
is not accounted for because it is not within the time limits set forth in §4A1.2(e) and
did not receive criminal history points, an upward departure may be warranted. Con-
Amendment 802
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 159
versely, if the time actually served by the defendant for the prior offense was substan-
tially less than the length of the original sentence imposed, a downward departure may
be warranted.
Excluding Stale Convictions
For all three specific offense characteristics, the amendment considers prior convic-
tions only if the convictions receive criminal history points under the rules in Chapter
Four. Counting only convictions that receive criminal history points addresses con-
cerns that the existing guideline sometimes has provided for an unduly severe en-
hancement based on a single offense so old it did not receive criminal history points.
The Commission’s research has found that a defendant’s criminal history score is a
strong indicator of recidivism risk, and it is therefore appropriate to employ the crim-
inal history rules in this context. See U.S. Sent. Comm’n, Recidivism Among Federal
Offenders: A Comprehensive Overview (2016). The limitation to offenses receiving
criminal history points also promotes ease of application and uniformity throughout
the guidelines. See 28 U.S.C. § 994(c)(2) (directing the Commission to establish cate-
gories of offenses based on appropriate mitigating and aggravating factors); cf. USSG
§2K2.1, comment. (n.10) (imposing enhancements based on a defendant’s predicate
convictions only if they received criminal history points).
Application of the “Single Sentence Rule”
The amendment also contains an application note addressing the situation when a
defendant was simultaneously sentenced for an illegal reentry offense and another
federal felony offense. It clarifies that, in such a case, the illegal reentry offense counts
towards subsection (b)(1), while the other felony offense counts towards subsec-
tion (b)(3).
Because the amendment is intended to make a distinction between illegal reentry of-
fenses and other types of offenses, the Commission concluded that it was appropriate
to ensure that such convictions are separately accounted for under the applicable spe-
cific offense characteristics, even if they might otherwise constitute a “single sentence”
under §4A1.2(a)(2). For example, if the single sentence rule applied, a defendant who
was sentenced simultaneously for an illegal reentry and a federal felony drug-traffick-
ing offense might receive an enhancement of only 4 levels under subsection (b)(1), even
though, if the two sentences had been imposed separately, the drug offense would re-
sult in an additional enhancement of between 4 and 10 levels under subsection (b)(3).
Definition of “Crime of Violence”
The amendment continues to use the term “crime of violence,” although now solely in
reference to the 2-level enhancement for three or more misdemeanor convictions at
subsections (b)(2)(E) and (b)(3)(E). The amendment conforms the definition of “crime
of violence” in Application Note 2 to that adopted for use in the career offender guide-
line effective August 1, 2016. See Notice of Submission to Congress of Amendment to
the Sentencing Guidelines Effective August 1, 2016, 81 FR 4741 (Jan. 27, 2016). Uni-
formity and ease of application weigh in favor of using a consistent definition for the
same term throughout the Guidelines Manual.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2016.
Amendment 803
160 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
AMENDMENT 803
AMENDMENT: Section 5B1.3 is amended in the heading by striking “Conditions—” and
inserting “Conditions”;
in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(8) by striking the initial letter of the first word in each
subsection and inserting the appropriate capital letter for the word, and by striking
the semicolon at the end of each subsection and inserting a period;
in subsection (a)(6), as so amended, by inserting before the period at the end the fol-
lowing: “. If there is a court-established payment schedule for making restitution or
paying the assessment (see 18 U.S.C. § 3572(d)), the defendant shall adhere to the
schedule”;
by striking subsection (a)(9) as follows:
“(9) (A) in a state in which the requirements of the Sex Offender Registration
and Notification Act (see 42 U.S.C. §§ 16911 and 16913) do not apply,
a defendant convicted of a sexual offense as described in 18 U.S.C.
§ 4042(c)(4) (Pub. L. 105–119, § 115(a)(8), Nov. 26, 1997) shall report
the address where the defendant will reside and any subsequent
change of residence to the probation officer responsible for supervision,
and shall register as a sex offender in any State where the person re-
sides, is employed, carries on a vocation, or is a student; or
(B) in a state in which the requirements of Sex Offender Registration and
Notification Act apply, a sex offender shall (i) register, and keep such
registration current, where the offender resides, where the offender is
an employee, and where the offender is a student, and for the initial
registration, a sex offender also shall register in the jurisdiction in
which convicted if such jurisdiction is different from the jurisdiction of
residence; (ii) provide information required by 42 U.S.C. § 16914; and
(iii) keep such registration current for the full registration period as set
forth in 42 U.S.C. § 16915;”,
and inserting the following:
“(9) If the defendant is required to register under the Sex Offender Registration
and Notification Act, the defendant shall comply with the requirements of that
Act (see 18 U.S.C. § 3563(a)).”;
and in subsection (a)(10) by striking “the defendant” and inserting “The defendant”;
in subsection (b) by striking “The court” and inserting the following:
“Discretionary Conditions
The court”;
in subsection (c) by striking “(Policy Statement) The” and inserting the following:
“ ‘Standard’ Conditions (Policy Statement)
Amendment 803
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 161
The”;
and by striking paragraphs (1) through (14) as follows:
“(1) the defendant shall not leave the judicial district or other specified geographic
area without the permission of the court or probation officer;
(2) the defendant shall report to the probation officer as directed by the court or
probation officer and shall submit a truthful and complete written report
within the first five days of each month;
(3) the defendant shall answer truthfully all inquiries by the probation officer and
follow the instructions of the probation officer;
(4) the defendant shall support the defendant’s dependents and meet other family
responsibilities (including, but not limited to, complying with the terms of any
court order or administrative process pursuant to the law of a state, the Dis-
trict of Columbia, or any other possession or territory of the United States re-
quiring payments by the defendant for the support and maintenance of any
child or of a child and the parent with whom the child is living);
(5) the defendant shall work regularly at a lawful occupation unless excused by
the probation officer for schooling, training, or other acceptable reasons;
(6) the defendant shall notify the probation officer at least ten days prior to any
change of residence or employment;
(7) the defendant shall refrain from excessive use of alcohol and shall not pur-
chase, possess, use, distribute, or administer any controlled substance, or any
paraphernalia related to any controlled substance, except as prescribed by a
physician;
(8) the defendant shall not frequent places where controlled substances are ille-
gally sold, used, distributed, or administered, or other places specified by the
court;
(9) the defendant shall not associate with any persons engaged in criminal activ-
ity, and shall not associate with any person convicted of a felony unless granted
permission to do so by the probation officer;
(10) the defendant shall permit a probation officer to visit the defendant at any time
at home or elsewhere and shall permit confiscation of any contraband observed
in plain view by the probation officer;
(11) the defendant shall notify the probation officer within seventy-two hours of
being arrested or questioned by a law enforcement officer;
(12) the defendant shall not enter into any agreement to act as an informer or a
special agent of a law enforcement agency without the permission of the court;
(13) as directed by the probation officer, the defendant shall notify third parties of
risks that may be occasioned by the defendant’s criminal record or personal
history or characteristics, and shall permit the probation officer to make such
Amendment 803
162 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
notifications and to confirm the defendant’s compliance with such notification
requirement;
(14) the defendant shall pay the special assessment imposed or adhere to a court-
ordered installment schedule for the payment of the special assessment.”,
and inserting the following:
“(1) The defendant shall report to the probation office in the federal judicial district
where he or she is authorized to reside within 72 hours of the time the defend-
ant was sentenced, unless the probation officer instructs the defendant to re-
port to a different probation office or within a different time frame.
(2) After initially reporting to the probation office, the defendant will receive in-
structions from the court or the probation officer about how and when to report
to the probation officer, and the defendant shall report to the probation officer
as instructed.
(3) The defendant shall not knowingly leave the federal judicial district where he
or she is authorized to reside without first getting permission from the court
or the probation officer.
(4) The defendant shall answer truthfully the questions asked by the probation
officer.
(5) The defendant shall live at a place approved by the probation officer. If the
defendant plans to change where he or she lives or anything about his or her
living arrangements (such as the people the defendant lives with), the defend-
ant shall notify the probation officer at least 10 days before the change. If no-
tifying the probation officer at least 10 days in advance is not possible due to
unanticipated circumstances, the defendant shall notify the probation officer
within 72 hours of becoming aware of a change or expected change.
(6) The defendant shall allow the probation officer to visit the defendant at any
time at his or her home or elsewhere, and the defendant shall permit the pro-
bation officer to take any items prohibited by the conditions of the defendant’s
supervision that he or she observes in plain view.
(7) The defendant shall work full time (at least 30 hours per week) at a lawful type
of employment, unless the probation officer excuses the defendant from doing
so. If the defendant does not have full-time employment he or she shall try to
find full-time employment, unless the probation officer excuses the defendant
from doing so. If the defendant plans to change where the defendant works or
anything about his or her work (such as the position or the job responsibilities),
the defendant shall notify the probation officer at least 10 days before the
change. If notifying the probation officer at least 10 days in advance is not
possible due to unanticipated circumstances, the defendant shall notify the
probation officer within 72 hours of becoming aware of a change or expected
change.
(8) The defendant shall not communicate or interact with someone the defendant
knows is engaged in criminal activity. If the defendant knows someone has
been convicted of a felony, the defendant shall not knowingly communicate or
Amendment 803
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 163
interact with that person without first getting the permission of the probation
officer.
(9) If the defendant is arrested or questioned by a law enforcement officer, the
defendant shall notify the probation officer within 72 hours.
(10) The defendant shall not own, possess, or have access to a firearm, ammunition,
destructive device, or dangerous weapon (i.e., anything that was designed, or
was modified for, the specific purpose of causing bodily injury or death to an-
other person, such as nunchakus or tasers).
(11) The defendant shall not act or make any agreement with a law enforcement
agency to act as a confidential human source or informant without first getting
the permission of the court.
(12) If the probation officer determines that the defendant poses a risk to another
person (including an organization), the probation officer may require the de-
fendant to notify the person about the risk and the defendant shall comply with
that instruction. The probation officer may contact the person and confirm that
the defendant has notified the person about the risk.
(13) The defendant shall follow the instructions of the probation officer related to
the conditions of supervision.”;
and in subsection (d) by striking “(Policy Statement) The” and inserting the following:
“ ‘Special’ Conditions (Policy Statement)
The”;
by striking paragraph (1) as follows:
“(1) Possession of Weapons
If the instant conviction is for a felony, or if the defendant was previously con-
victed of a felony or used a firearm or other dangerous weapon in the course of
the instant offense — a condition prohibiting the defendant from possessing a
firearm or other dangerous weapon.”,
and inserting the following:
“(1) Support of Dependents
(A) If the defendant has one or more dependents — a condition specifying
that the defendant shall support his or her dependents.
(B) If the defendant is ordered by the government to make child support
payments or to make payments to support a person caring for a child
— a condition specifying that the defendant shall make the payments
and comply with the other terms of the order.”;
and in paragraph (4) by striking “Program Participation” in the heading; by inserting
“(A)” before “a condition requiring”; and by inserting before the period at the end the
Amendment 803
164 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
following: “; and (B) a condition specifying that the defendant shall not use or possess
alcohol”.
The Commentary to §5B1.3 captioned “Application Note” is amended by striking Note
1 as follows:
“1. Application of Subsection (a)(9)(A) and (B).—Some jurisdictions continue to
register sex offenders pursuant to the sex offender registry in place prior to
July 27, 2006, the date of enactment of the Adam Walsh Act, which contained
the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act. In such a jurisdiction, sub-
section (a)(9)(A) will apply. In a jurisdiction that has implemented the require-
ments of the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act, subsection
(a)(9)(B) will apply. (See 42 U.S.C. §§ 16911 and 16913.)”,
and inserting the following:
“1. Application of Subsection (c)(4).—Although the condition in subsection (c)(4)
requires the defendant to ‘answer truthfully’ the questions asked by the pro-
bation officer, a defendant’s legitimate invocation of the Fifth Amendment
privilege against self-incrimination in response to a probation officer’s question
shall not be considered a violation of this condition.”.
Section 5D1.3 is amended is amended in the heading by striking “Conditions—” and
inserting “Conditions”;
in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(6) by striking the initial letter of the first word in each
subsection and inserting the appropriate capital letter for the word, and by striking
the semicolon at the end of each subsection and inserting a period;
in subsection (a)(6), as so amended, by inserting before the period at the end the fol-
lowing: “. If there is a court-established payment schedule for making restitution or
paying the assessment (see 18 U.S.C. § 3572(d)), the defendant shall adhere to the
schedule”;
by striking subsection (a)(7) as follows:
“(7) (A) in a state in which the requirements of the Sex Offender Registration
and Notification Act (see 42 U.S.C. §§ 16911 and 16913) do not apply,
a defendant convicted of a sexual offense as described in 18 U.S.C.
§ 4042(c)(4) (Pub. L. 105–119, § 115(a)(8), Nov. 26, 1997) shall report
the address where the defendant will reside and any subsequent
change of residence to the probation officer responsible for supervision,
and shall register as a sex offender in any State where the person re-
sides, is employed, carries on a vocation, or is a student; or
(B) in a state in which the requirements of Sex Offender Registration and
Notification Act apply, a sex offender shall (i) register, and keep such
registration current, where the offender resides, where the offender is
an employee, and where the offender is a student, and for the initial
registration, a sex offender also shall register in the jurisdiction in
which convicted if such jurisdiction is different from the jurisdiction of
residence; (ii) provide information required by 42 U.S.C. § 16914; and
(iii) keep such registration current for the full registration period as set
forth in 42 U.S.C. § 16915;”,
Amendment 803
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 165
and inserting the following:
“(7) If the defendant is required to register under the Sex Offender Registration
and Notification Act, the defendant shall comply with the requirements of that
Act (see 18 U.S.C. § 3583(d)).”;
and in subsection (a)(8) by striking “the defendant” and inserting “The defendant”;
in subsection (b) by striking “The court” and inserting the following:
“Discretionary Conditions
The court”;
in subsection (c) by striking “(Policy Statement) The” and inserting the following:
“ ‘Standard’ Conditions (Policy Statement)
The”;
and by striking paragraphs (1) through (15) as follows:
“(1) the defendant shall not leave the judicial district or other specified geographic
area without the permission of the court or probation officer;
(2) the defendant shall report to the probation officer as directed by the court or
probation officer and shall submit a truthful and complete written report
within the first five days of each month;
(3) the defendant shall answer truthfully all inquiries by the probation officer and
follow the instructions of the probation officer;
(4) the defendant shall support the defendant’s dependents and meet other family
responsibilities (including, but not limited to, complying with the terms of any
court order or administrative process pursuant to the law of a state, the Dis-
trict of Columbia, or any other possession or territory of the United States re-
quiring payments by the defendant for the support and maintenance of any
child or of a child and the parent with whom the child is living);
(5) the defendant shall work regularly at a lawful occupation unless excused by
the probation officer for schooling, training, or other acceptable reasons;
(6) the defendant shall notify the probation officer at least ten days prior to any
change of residence or employment;
(7) the defendant shall refrain from excessive use of alcohol and shall not pur-
chase, possess, use, distribute, or administer any controlled substance, or any
paraphernalia related to any controlled substance, except as prescribed by a
physician;
(8) the defendant shall not frequent places where controlled substances are ille-
gally sold, used, distributed, or administered, or other places specified by the
court;
Amendment 803
166 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
(9) the defendant shall not associate with any persons engaged in criminal activ-
ity, and shall not associate with any person convicted of a felony unless granted
permission to do so by the probation officer;
(10) the defendant shall permit a probation officer to visit the defendant at any time
at home or elsewhere and shall permit confiscation of any contraband observed
in plain view by the probation officer;
(11) the defendant shall notify the probation officer within seventy-two hours of
being arrested or questioned by a law enforcement officer;
(12) the defendant shall not enter into any agreement to act as an informer or a
special agent of a law enforcement agency without the permission of the court;
(13) as directed by the probation officer, the defendant shall notify third parties of
risks that may be occasioned by the defendant’s criminal record or personal
history or characteristics, and shall permit the probation officer to make such
notifications and to confirm the defendant’s compliance with such notification
requirement;
(14) the defendant shall pay the special assessment imposed or adhere to a court-
ordered installment schedule for the payment of the special assessment;
(15) the defendant shall notify the probation officer of any material change in the
defendant’s economic circumstances that might affect the defendant’s ability
to pay any unpaid amount of restitution, fines, or special assessments.”,
and inserting the following:
“(1) The defendant shall report to the probation office in the federal judicial district
where he or she is authorized to reside within 72 hours of release from impris-
onment, unless the probation officer instructs the defendant to report to a dif-
ferent probation office or within a different time frame.
(2) After initially reporting to the probation office, the defendant will receive in-
structions from the court or the probation officer about how and when to report
to the probation officer, and the defendant shall report to the probation officer
as instructed.
(3) The defendant shall not knowingly leave the federal judicial district where he
or she is authorized to reside without first getting permission from the court
or the probation officer.
(4) The defendant shall answer truthfully the questions asked by the probation
officer.
(5) The defendant shall live at a place approved by the probation officer. If the
defendant plans to change where he or she lives or anything about his or her
living arrangements (such as the people the defendant lives with), the defend-
ant shall notify the probation officer at least 10 days before the change. If no-
tifying the probation officer at least 10 days in advance is not possible due to
unanticipated circumstances, the defendant shall notify the probation officer
within 72 hours of becoming aware of a change or expected change.
Amendment 803
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 167
(6) The defendant shall allow the probation officer to visit the defendant at any
time at his or her home or elsewhere, and the defendant shall permit the pro-
bation officer to take any items prohibited by the conditions of the defendant’s
supervision that he or she observes in plain view.
(7) The defendant shall work full time (at least 30 hours per week) at a lawful type
of employment, unless the probation officer excuses the defendant from doing
so. If the defendant does not have full-time employment he or she shall try to
find full-time employment, unless the probation officer excuses the defendant
from doing so. If the defendant plans to change where the defendant works or
anything about his or her work (such as the position or the job responsibilities),
the defendant shall notify the probation officer at least 10 days before the
change. If notifying the probation officer in advance is not possible due to un-
anticipated circumstances, the defendant shall notify the probation officer
within 72 hours of becoming aware of a change or expected change.
(8) The defendant shall not communicate or interact with someone the defendant
knows is engaged in criminal activity. If the defendant knows someone has
been convicted of a felony, the defendant shall not knowingly communicate or
interact with that person without first getting the permission of the probation
officer.
(9) If the defendant is arrested or questioned by a law enforcement officer, the
defendant shall notify the probation officer within 72 hours.
(10) The defendant shall not own, possess, or have access to a firearm, ammunition,
destructive device, or dangerous weapon (i.e., anything that was designed, or
was modified for, the specific purpose of causing bodily injury or death to an-
other person, such as nunchakus or tasers).
(11) The defendant shall not act or make any agreement with a law enforcement
agency to act as a confidential human source or informant without first getting
the permission of the court.
(12) If the probation officer determines that the defendant poses a risk to another
person (including an organization), the probation officer may require the de-
fendant to notify the person about the risk and the defendant shall comply with
that instruction. The probation officer may contact the person and confirm that
the defendant has notified the person about the risk.
(13) The defendant shall follow the instructions of the probation officer related to
the conditions of supervision.”;
and in subsection (d) by striking “(Policy Statement) The” and inserting the following:
“ ‘Special’ Conditions (Policy Statement)
The”;
by striking paragraph (1) as follows:
“(1) Possession of Weapons
Amendment 803
168 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
If the instant conviction is for a felony, or if the defendant was previously con-
victed of a felony or used a firearm or other dangerous weapon in the course of
the instant offense — a condition prohibiting the defendant from possessing a
firearm or other dangerous weapon.”,
and inserting the following:
“(1) Support of Dependents
(A) If the defendant has one or more dependents — a condition specifying
that the defendant shall support his or her dependents.
(B) If the defendant is ordered by the government to make child support
payments or to make payments to support a person caring for a child
— a condition specifying that the defendant shall make the payments
and comply with the other terms of the order.”;
in paragraph (4) by striking “Program Participation” in the heading; by inserting “(A)”
before “a condition requiring”; and by inserting before the period at the end the follow-
ing: “; and (B) a condition specifying that the defendant shall not use or possess alco-
hol”;
and by inserting at the end the following new paragraph (8):
“(8) Unpaid Restitution, Fines, or Special Assessments
If the defendant has any unpaid amount of restitution, fines, or special assess-
ments, the defendant shall notify the probation officer of any material change
in the defendant’s economic circumstances that might affect the defendant’s
ability to pay.”.
The Commentary to §5D1.3 captioned “Application Note” is amended by striking
Note 1 as follows:
“1. Application of Subsection (a)(7)(A) and (B).—Some jurisdictions continue to
register sex offenders pursuant to the sex offender registry in place prior to
July 27, 2006, the date of enactment of the Adam Walsh Act, which contained
the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act. In such a jurisdiction, sub-
section (a)(7)(A) will apply. In a jurisdiction that has implemented the require-
ments of the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act, subsec-
tion (a)(7)(B) will apply. (See 42 U.S.C. §§ 16911 and 16913.)”,
and inserting the following:
“1. Application of Subsection (c)(4).—Although the condition in subsection (c)(4)
requires the defendant to ‘answer truthfully’ the questions asked by the pro-
bation officer, a defendant’s legitimate invocation of the Fifth Amendment
privilege against self-incrimination in response to a probation officer’s question
shall not be considered a violation of this condition.”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment is a result of the Commission’s multi-year
review of sentencing practices relating to federal probation and supervised release.
Amendment 803
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 169
The amendment makes several changes to the guidelines and policy statements re-
lated to conditions of probation, §5B1.3 (Conditions of Probation), and supervised re-
lease, §5D1.3 (Conditions of Supervised Release).
When imposing a sentence of probation or a sentence of imprisonment that includes a
period of supervised release, the court is required to impose certain conditions of su-
pervision listed by statute. 18 U.S.C. §§ 3563(a) and 3583(d). Congress has also em-
powered courts to impose additional conditions of probation and supervised release
that are reasonably related to statutory sentencing factors contained in 18 U.S.C.
§ 3553(a), so long as those conditions “involve only such deprivations of liberty or prop-
erty as are reasonably necessary for the purposes indicated in 3553(a)(2).” 18 U.S.C.
§ 3563(b); see also 18 U.S.C. § 3583(d). Additional conditions of supervised release
must also be consistent with any pertinent policy statements issued by the Commis-
sion. See 18 U.S.C. § 3583(d)(3).
The Commission is directed by its organic statute to promulgate policy statements on
the appropriate use of the conditions of probation and supervised release, see 28 U.S.C.
§ 994(a)(2)(B), and has implemented this directive in §§5B1.3 and 5D1.3. The provi-
sions follow a parallel structure, first setting forth those conditions of supervision that
are required by statute in their respective subsections (a) and (b), and then providing
guidance on discretionary conditions, which are categorized as “standard” conditions,
“special” conditions, and “additional” special conditions, in subsections (c), (d), and (e),
respectively.
In a number of cases, defendants have raised objections (with varied degrees of suc-
cess) to the conditions of supervised release and probation imposed upon them at the
time of sentencing. See, e.g., United States v. Munoz, 812 F.3d 809 (10th Cir. 2016);
United States v. Kappes, 782 F.3d 828, 848 (7th Cir. 2015); United States v. Siegel,
753 F.3d 705 (7th Cir. 2014); United States v. Bahr, 730 F.3d 963 (9th Cir. 2013);
United States v. Maloney, 513 F.3d 350, 357–59 (3d Cir. 2008); United States v.
Saechao, 418 F.3d 1073, 1081 (9th Cir. 2005). Challenges have been made on the basis
that certain conditions are vaguely worded, pose constitutional concerns, or have been
categorized as “standard” conditions in a manner that has led to their improper impo-
sition upon particular offenders.
The amendment responds to many of the concerns raised in these challenges by revis-
ing, clarifying, and rearranging the conditions contained in §§5B1.3 and 5D1.3 in order
to make them easier for defendants to understand and probation officers to enforce.
Many of the challenged conditions are those laid out in the Judgment in a Criminal
Case Form, AO245B, which are nearly identical to the conditions in §§5B1.3 and 5D1.3.
The amendment was supported by the Criminal Law Committee (CLC) of the Judicial
Conference of the United States. The CLC has long taken an active and ongoing role
in developing, monitoring and recommending revisions to the condition of supervision,
which represent the core supervision practices required by the federal supervision
model. The changes in the amendment are consistent with proposed changes to the
national judgment form recently endorsed by the CLC and Administrative Office of the
U.S. Courts, after an exhaustive review of those conditions aided by probation officers
from throughout the country.
As part of this broader revision, the conditions in §§5B1.3 and 5D1.3 have been renum-
bered. Where the specific conditions discussed below are identified by a guidelines pro-
vision reference, that numeration is in reference to their pre-amendment order.
Amendment 803
170 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Court-Established Payment Schedules
First, the amendment amends §§5B1.3(a)(6) and 5D1.3(a)(6) to set forth as a “manda-
tory” condition that if there is a court-established payment schedule for making resti-
tution or paying a special assessment, the defendant shall adhere to the schedule. Pre-
viously, those conditions were classified as “standard.” As a conforming change, similar
language at §§5B1.3(c)(14) and 5D1.3(c)(14) is deleted. This change is made to more
closely adhere to the requirements of 18 U.S.C. § 3572(d).
Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act
Second, the amendment amends §§5B1.3(a)(9) and 5D1.3(a)(7) to clarify that, if the
defendant is required to register under the Sex Offender Registration and Notification
Act (SORNA), the defendant shall comply with the requirements of the SORNA. Lan-
guage in the guideline provisions and the accompanying commentary indicating that
the Act applies in some states and not in others is correspondingly deleted. After re-
ceiving testimony from the Department of Justice suggesting the current condition
could be misread, the Commission determined that the condition’s language should be
simplified and updated to unambiguously reflect that federal sex offender registration
requirements apply in all states.
Reporting to the Probation Officer
Third, the amendment divides the initial and regular reporting requirements,
§§5B1.3(a)(2) and 5D1.3(a)(2), into two more definite provisions. The amendment also
amends the conditions to require that the defendant report to the probation office in
the jurisdiction where he or she is authorized to reside, within 72 hours of release
unless otherwise directed, and that the defendant must thereafter report to the proba-
tion officer as instructed by the court or the probation officer.
Leaving the Jurisdiction
Fourth, the amendment revises §§5B1.3(c)(1) and 5D1.3(c)(1), which prohibit defend-
ants from leaving the judicial district without permission, for clarity and to insert a
mental state (mens rea) requirement that a defendant must not leave the district
“knowingly.” Testimony received by the Commission has observed that a rule prohib-
iting a defendant from leaving the district without permission of the court or probation
officer may be unfairly applied to a defendant who unknowingly moves between dis-
tricts. The Commission concluded that this change appropriately responds to that con-
cern.
Answering Truthfully; Following Instructions
Fifth, the amendment divides §§5B1.3(c)(3) and 5D1.3(c)(3) into separate conditions
which individually require the defendant to “answer truthfully” the questions of the
probation officer and to follow the instructions of the probation officer “related to the
conditions of supervision.”
The amendment also adds commentary to clarify that a defendant’s legitimate invoca-
tion of the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination in response to a pro-
bation officer’s question shall not be considered a violation of the “answer truthfully”
condition. The Commission determined that this approach adequately addresses Fifth
Amendment concerns raised by some courts, see, e.g., United States v. Kappes,
782 F.3d 828, 848 (7th Cir. 2015) and United States v. Saechao, 418 F.3d 1073, 1081
Amendment 803
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 171
(9th Cir. 2005), while preserving the probation officer’s ability to adequately supervise
the defendant.
Residence and Employment
Sixth, the amendment clarifies the standard conditions relating to a defendant’s resi-
dence, §§5B1.3(c)(6) and 5D1.3(c)(6), and the requirement that the defendant work full
time, §§5B1.3(c)(5) and 5D1.3(c)(5). The revised conditions spell out in plain language
that the defendant must live at a place “approved by the probation officer,” and that
the defendant must work full time (at least 30 hours per week) at a lawful type of
employment — or seek to do so — unless excused by the probation officer. The defend-
ant must also notify the probation officer of changes in residence or employment at
least 10 days in advance of the change or, if this is not possible, within 72 hours of
becoming aware of a change. The Commission determined that these changes are ap-
propriate to ensure that defendants are made aware of what will be required of them
while under supervision. These requirements and associated benchmarks (e.g.,
30 hours per week) are supported by testimony from the CLC as appropriate to meet
supervision needs.
Visits by Probation Officer
Seventh, the amendment amends the conditions requiring the defendant to permit the
probation officer to visit the defendant at any time, at home or elsewhere, and to permit
the probation officer to confiscate items prohibited by the defendant’s terms of release,
§§5B1.3(c)(10) and 5D1.3(c)(10). The revision provides plain language notice to defend-
ants and guidance to probation officers.
The Seventh Circuit has criticized this condition as intrusive and not necessarily con-
nected to the offense of conviction, see United States v. Kappes, 782 F.3d 828, 850–51
(7th Cir. 2015) and United States v. Thompson, 777 F.3d 368, 379–80 (7th Cir. 2015),
but the Commission has determined that, in some circumstance, adequate supervision
of defendants may require probation officers to have the flexibility to visit defendants
at off-hours, at their workplaces, and without advance notice to the supervisee. For
example, some supervisees work overnight shifts and, in order to verify that they are
in compliance with the condition of supervision requiring employment, a probation of-
ficer might have to visit them at their workplace very late in the evening.
Association with Criminals
Eighth, the amendment revises and clarifies the conditions mandating that the de-
fendant not associate with persons engaged in criminal activity or persons convicted
of a felony unless granted permission to do so by the probation officer, §§5B1.3(c)(9)
and 5D1.3(c)(9). As amended, the condition requires that the defendant must not “com-
municate or interact with” any person whom the defendant “knows” to be engaged in
“criminal activity” and prohibits the defendant from communicating or interacting
with those whom the defendant “knows” to have been “convicted of a felony” without
advance permission of the probation officer.
These revisions address concerns expressed by the Seventh Circuit that the condition
is vague and lacks a mens rea requirement. See United States v. Kappes, 782 F.3d 828,
848–49 (7th Cir. 2015); see also United States v. King, 608 F.3d 1122, 1128 (9th Cir.
2010) (upholding the condition by interpreting it to have an implicit mens rea require-
ment). The revision adds an express mental state requirement and replaces the term
“associate” with more definite language.
Amendment 803
172 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Arrested or Questioned by a Law Enforcement Officer
Ninth, the amendment makes clerical changes to the “standard” conditions requiring
that the defendant notify the probation officer after being arrested or questioned by a
law enforcement officer. See §§5B1.3(11) and 5D1.3(11).
Firearms and Dangerous Weapons
Tenth, the amendment reclassifies the “special” conditions which require that the de-
fendant not possess a firearm or other dangerous weapon, §§5B1.3(d)(1) and
5D1.3(d)(1), as “standard” conditions and clarifies those conditions. As amended, the
defendant must not “own, possess, or have access to” a firearm, ammunition, destruc-
tive device, or dangerous weapon. After reviewing the testimony from the CLC and
others, the Commission determined that reclassifying this condition as a “standard”
condition will promote public safety and reduce safety risks to probation officers. The
amendment also defines “dangerous weapon” as “anything that was designed, or was
modified for, the specific purpose of causing bodily injury or death to another person,
such as nunchakus or tasers.”
Acting as an Informant
Eleventh, the amendment rewords the “standard” condition at §§5B1.3(c)(12) and
5D1.3(c)(12) requiring that the defendant not enter into an agreement to act as an
informant without permission of the court. The condition is revised to improve clarity.
Duty to Notify of Risks Posed by the Defendant
Twelfth, the amendment revises the conditions requiring the defendant, at the direc-
tion of the probation officer, to notify others of risks the defendant may pose based on
his or her personal history or characteristics, §§5B1.3(c)(13) and 5D1.3(c)(13). As
amended, the condition provides that, if the probation officer determines that the de-
fendant poses a risk to another person, the probation officer may require the defendant
to tell the person about the risk and permits the probation officer to confirm that the
defendant has done so. The Commission determined that this revision is appropriate
to address criticism by the Seventh Circuit regarding potential ambiguity in how the
condition is currently phrased. See United States v. Thompson, 777 F.3d 368, 379
(7th Cir. 2015).
Support of Dependents
Thirteenth, the amendment clarifies and moves the dependent support requirement
from the list of “standard” conditions, §§5B1.3(c)(4) and 5D1.3(c)(4), to the list of “spe-
cial” conditions in subsection (d). As amended, the conditions require that, if the de-
fendant has dependents, he or she must support those dependents; and if the defend-
ant is ordered to make child support payments, he or she must make the payments
and comply with the other terms of the order.
These changes address concerns expressed by the Seventh Circuit that the current
condition — which requires a defendant to “support his or her dependents and meet
other family responsibilities” — is vague and does apply to defendants who have no
dependents. See United States v. Kappes, 782 F.3d 828, 849 (7th Cir. 2015) and United
States v. Thompson, 777 F.3d 368, 379–80 (7th Cir. 2015). The amendment uses
plainer language to provide better notice to the defendant about what is required. The
Amendment 804
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 173
Commission determined that this condition need not apply to all defendants but only
to those with dependents.
Alcohol; Controlled Substances; Frequenting Places Where Controlled Sub-
stances are Sold
Fourteenth, the standard conditions requiring that the defendant refrain from exces-
sive use of alcohol, not possess or distribute controlled substances or paraphernalia,
and not frequent places where controlled substances are illegally sold,
§§5B1.3(c)(7)–(8) and 5D1.3(c)(7)–(8), have been deleted. The Commission determined
that these conditions are either best dealt with as special conditions or are redundant
with other conditions. Specifically, to account for the supervision needs of defendants
with alcohol abuse problems, a new special condition that the defendant “must not use
or possess alcohol” has been added. The requirement that the defendant abstain from
the illegal use of controlled substances is covered by the “mandatory” conditions pro-
hibiting commission of additional crimes and requiring substance abuse testing. Fi-
nally, the prohibition on frequenting places where controlled substances are illegally
sold is encompassed by the “standard” condition that defendants not associate with
those they know to be criminals or who are engaged in criminal activity.
Material Change in Economic Circumstances (§5D1.3 Only)
Finally, with respect to supervised release only, the “standard” condition requiring
that the defendant notify the probation officer of any material change in the defend-
ant’s economic circumstances that might affect the defendant’s ability to pay any un-
paid amount of restitution, fines, or special assessments, §5D1.3(c)(15), is reclassified
as a “special” condition in subsection (d). Testimony from the CLC and others indicated
that defendants on supervised release often have no outstanding restitution, fines, or
special assessments remaining at the time of their release, rendering the condition
superfluous in those cases. No change has been made to the parallel “mandatory” con-
dition of probation at §5B1.3(a)(7).
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2016.
AMENDMENT 804
AMENDMENT: Section 2K2.1 is amended in subsection (a)(8) by inserting “, or 18 U.S.C.
§ 1715” before the period at the end.
The Commentary to §2K2.1 captioned “Statutory Provisions” is amended by inserting
after “(k)-(o),” the following: “1715,”.
The Commentary to §2M6.1 captioned “Application Notes” is amended in Note 1 by
striking “831(f)(2)” and inserting “831(g)(2)”, and by striking “831(f)(1)” and inserting
“831(g)(1)”.
The Commentary to §2T1.6 captioned “Background” is amended by striking “The of-
fense is a felony that is infrequently prosecuted.”.
Chapter Two, Part T, Subpart 2, is amended in the Introductory Commentary by strik-
ing “Because these offenses are no longer a major enforcement priority, no effort” and
inserting “No effort”.
Amendment 804
174 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
Section 2T2.1 is amended by striking the Commentary captioned “Background” as fol-
lows:
“Background: The most frequently prosecuted conduct violating this section is operat-
ing an illegal still. 26 U.S.C. § 5601(a)(1).”.
Section 2T2.2 is amended by striking the Commentary captioned “Background” as fol-
lows:
“Background: Prosecutions of this type are infrequent.”.
Appendix A (Statutory Index) is amended by inserting after the line referenced to
18 U.S.C. § 1712 the following:
“18 U.S.C. § 1715 2K2.1”;
by inserting after the line referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 2280 the following:
“18 U.S.C. § 2280a 2A1.1, 2A1.2, 2A1.3, 2A1.4, 2A2.1, 2A2.2, 2A2.3, 2A6.1,
2B1.1, 2B3.2, 2K1.3, 2K1.4, 2M5.2, 2M5.3, 2M6.1,
2Q1.1, 2Q1.2, 2X1.1, 2X2.1, 2X3.1”;
by inserting after the line referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 2281 the following:
“18 U.S.C. § 2281a 2A1.1, 2A1.2, 2A1.3, 2A1.4, 2A2.1, 2A2.2, 2A2.3, 2A6.1,
2B1.1, 2B3.2, 2K1.4, 2M6.1, 2Q1.1, 2Q1.2, 2X1.1”;
and by inserting after the line referenced to 18 U.S.C. § 2332h the following:
“18 U.S.C. § 2332i 2A6.1, 2K1.4, 2M2.1, 2M2.3, 2M6.1”.
REASON FOR AMENDMENT: This amendment responds to recently enacted legislation
and miscellaneous guideline application issues.
USA FREEDOM Act
The Uniting and Strengthening America by Fulfilling Rights and Ensuring Effective
Discipline Over Monitoring Act (“USA FREEDOM Act”) of 2015, Pub. L. 114–23
(June 2, 2015), set forth changes to statutes related to maritime navigation and nu-
clear terrorism and provided new and expanded criminal offenses to implement the
United States’ obligations under certain provisions of four international conventions.
The USA FREEDOM Act also specified that the new crimes constitute “federal crimes
of terrorism.” See 18 U.S.C. § 2332b(g)(5). The amendment responds to the USA FREE-
DOM Act by referencing the new offenses in Appendix A (Statutory Index) to various
Chapter Two guidelines covering murder and assault, weapons, national security, and
environmental offenses.
First, the USA FREEDOM Act enacted 18 U.S.C. § 2280a (Violence against maritime
navigation and maritime transport involving weapons of mass destruction). Subsec-
tions 2280a(a)(1)(A) and (a)(1)(B)(i) prohibit certain acts against maritime navigation
committed in a manner that causes or is likely to cause death, serious injury, or dam-
age, when the purpose of the conduct is to intimidate a population or to compel a gov-
Amendment 804
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 175
ernment or international organization to do or abstain from doing any act. Subsec-
tions 2280a(a)(1)(B)(ii)–(vi) prohibit certain other acts against maritime navigation.
Subsection 2280a(a)(1)(C) prohibits transporting another person on board a ship know-
ing the person has committed a violation under 18 U.S.C. § 2280 (Violence against
maritime navigation) or certain subsections of section 2280a, or an offense under a
listed counterterrorism treaty. Subsection 2280a(a)(1)(D) prohibits injuring or killing
a person in connection with the commission of certain offenses under section 2280a.
Subsection 2280a(a)(1)(E) prohibits attempts and conspiracies under the statute. The
penalty for a violation of these subsections is a term of imprisonment for not more than
20 years. If the death of a person results, the penalty is imprisonment for any term of
years or for life. Subsection 2280a(a)(2) prohibits threats to commit offenses under
subsection 2280a(a)(1)(A), with a penalty of imprisonment of up to five years.
The new offenses at section 2280a are referenced in Appendix A (Statutory Index) to
the following Chapter Two guidelines: §§2A1.1 (First Degree Murder); 2A1.2 (Second
Degree Murder); 2A1.3 (Voluntary Manslaughter); 2A1.4 (Involuntary Manslaughter);
2A2.1 (Assault with Intent to Commit Murder; Attempted Murder); 2A2.2 (Aggravated
Assault); 2A2.3 (Assault); 2A6.1 (Threatening or Harassing Communications); 2B1.1
(Fraud); 2B3.2 (Extortion); 2K1.3 (Unlawful Receipt, Possession, or Transportation of
Explosive Materials; Prohibited Transactions Involving Explosive Materials); 2K1.4
(Arson; Property Damage by Use of Explosives); 2M5.2 (Exportation of Arms, Muni-
tions, or Military Equipment or Services Without Required Validated Export License);
2M5.3 (Providing Material Support or Resources to Designated Foreign Terrorist Or-
ganizations or Specially Designated Global Terrorists, or For a Terrorist Purpose);
2M6.1 (Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Weapons, and Other Weapons of Mass De-
struction); 2Q1.1 (Knowing Endangerment Resulting From Mishandling Hazardous or
Toxic Substances, Pesticides or Other Pollutants); 2Q1.2 (Mishandling of Hazardous
or Toxic Substances or Pesticides); 2X1.1 (Conspiracy); 2X2.1 (Aiding and Abetting);
and 2X3.1 (Accessory After the Fact).
Second, the USA FREEDOM Act enacted 18 U.S.C. § 2281a (Additional offenses
against maritime fixed platforms). Subsection 2281a(a)(1) prohibits certain acts that
occur either on a fixed platform or to a fixed platform committed in a manner that may
cause death, serious injury, or damage, when the purpose of the conduct is to intimi-
date a population or to compel a government or international organization to do or
abstain from doing any act. The penalty for a violation of subsection 2281a(a)(1) is a
term of imprisonment for not more than 20 years. If the death of a person results, the
penalty is imprisonment for any term of years or for life. Subsection 2281a(a)(2) pro-
hibits threats to commit offenses under subsection 2281a(a)(1), and the penalty for a
violation of subsection 2281a(a)(2) is imprisonment of up to five years.
The new offenses at 18 U.S.C. § 2281a are referenced to §§2A1.1, 2A1.2, 2A1.3, 2A1.4,
2A2.1, 2A2.2, 2A2.3, 2A6.1, 2B1.1, 2B3.2, 2K1.4, 2M6.1, 2Q1.1, 2Q1.2, and 2X1.1.
Third, the USA FREEDOM Act enacted 18 U.S.C. § 2332i (Acts of nuclear terrorism).
Section 2332i prohibits the possession or use of certain radioactive materials or devices
with the intent to cause death or serious bodily injury or to cause substantial damage
to property or the environment, as well as threats to commit any such acts. The penalty
for a violation of section 2332i is imprisonment for any term of years or for life.
The new offenses at 18 U.S.C. § 2332i are referenced to §§2A6.1, 2K1.4, 2M2.1 (De-
struction of, or Production of Defective, War Material, Premises, or Utilities), 2M2.3
(Destruction of, or Production of Defective, National Defense Material, Premises, or
Utilities), and 2M6.1.
Amendment 804
176 ║ Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016)
The amendment also makes clerical changes to Application Note 1 to §2M6.1 (Nuclear,
Biological, and Chemical Weapons, and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction) to reflect
the redesignation of a section in the United States Code by the USA FREEDOM Act.
The three new statutes provide a wide range of elements – meaning that the statutes
can be violated in a large number of alternative ways. The Commission performed a
section-by-section analysis of the elements of the new statutes and identified the Chap-
ter Two offense guidelines that appear most analogous. As a result, the Commission
determined that referencing the new statutes in Appendix A (Statutory Index) to a
range of guidelines will allow the courts to select the most appropriate guideline in
light of the nature of the conviction. For example, a reference to §2K1.4 (Arson; Prop-
erty Damage by Use of Explosives) is provided to account for when the defendant is
convicted under section 2280a(a)(1)(A)(i) for the use of an explosive device on a ship in
a manner that causes or is likely to cause death or serious injury. See USSG App. A,
Introduction (Where the statute is referenced to more than one guideline section, the
court is to “use the guideline most appropriate for the offense conduct charged in the
count of which the defendant was convicted.”). The Commission also found it persua-
sive that other similar statutes are referenced in Appendix A to a similar list of Chap-
ter Two guidelines. Referencing these three new statutes in a manner consistent with
the treatment of existing related statutes is reasonable to achieve parity, and will lead
to consistent application of the guidelines.
Firearms As Nonmailable Items under 18 U.S.C. § 1715
Section 1715 of title 18 of the United States Code (Firearms as nonmailable; regula-
tions) makes it unlawful to deposit for mailing or delivery by the mails pistols, revolv-
ers, and other firearms capable of being concealed on the person, and the penalty for a
violation of this statute is a term of imprisonment up to two years. Section 1715 is not
referenced in Appendix A (Statutory Index). The amendment amends Appendix A to
reference offenses under section 1715 to §2K2.1 (Unlawful Receipt, Possession, or
Transportation of Firearms or Ammunition; Prohibited Transactions Involving Fire-
arms or Ammunition). The amendment also amends §2K2.1 to provide a base offense
level of 6 under §2K2.1(a)(8) for convictions under section 1715.
The Commission received public comment suggesting that the lack of specific guidance
for section 1715 offenses caused unwarranted sentencing disparity. Commission data
provided further support for the need for an amendment to address this issue. Alt-
hough the data indicated that courts routinely applied §2K2.1 to violations of sec-
tion 1715, it also evidenced that courts were reaching different results in the base of-
fense level applied. The Commission was persuaded by the data and public comment
that an Appendix A reference and corresponding changes to §2K2.1 would reduce those
unwarranted sentencing disparities. The Commission determined that §2K2.1 is the
most analogous guideline for these types of firearms offenses. By providing an Appen-
dix A reference for section 1715, the amendment ensures that §2K2.1 will be consist-
ently applied to these offenses. Moreover, the Commission decided that the accompa-
nying changes to §2K2.1 will eliminate the disparate application of the base offense
levels in that guideline. The Commission selected the base offense level of 6 for these
offenses because similar statutory provisions with similar penalties are referenced to
§2K2.1(a)(8). The Commission concluded that referencing section 1715 will promote
consistency in application and avoid unwarranted sentencing disparities.
Amendment 804
Supplement to Appendix C (November 1, 2016) ║ 177
Background Commentary to §2T1.6 (Failing to Collect or Truthfully Account
for and Pay Over Tax)
The Background Commentary in §2T1.6 (Failing to Collect or Truthfully Account for
and Pay Over Tax) states that “[t]he offense is a felony that is infrequently prosecuted.”
Section 2T1.6 applies to violations of 26 U.S.C. § 7202 (Willful failure to collect or pay
over tax) which requires employers to withhold from an employee’s paychecks money
representing the employee’s personal income and Social Security taxes. If an employer
willfully fails to collect, truthfully account for, or pay over such taxes, 26 U.S.C. § 7202
provides both civil and criminal remedies. The amendment makes a clerical change to
the Background Commentary to §2T1.6 to delete the statement that section 7202 of-
fenses are infrequently prosecuted. The amendment makes additional clerical changes
in the Introductory Commentary to Chapter Two, Part T, Subpart 2 (Alcohol and To-
bacco Taxes), and the Background Commentary to §§2T2.1 (Non-Payment of Taxes)
and 2T2.2 (Regulatory Offenses) which has similar language.
The amendment reflects public comment received by the Commission that indicated
while the statement in the Background Commentary to §2T1.6 may have been accurate
when the commentary was originally written in 1987, the number of prosecutions un-
der section 7202 have since increased. Additionally, the Commission decided that re-
moving language characterizing the frequency of prosecutions for the tax offenses sen-
tenced under §§2T1.6, 2T2.1, and 2T2.2 will remove the perception that the Commis-
sion has taken a position regarding the relative frequency of prosecution of such of-
fenses.
Effective Date: The effective date of this amendment is November 1, 2016.
